Shock is a medical emergency in which the organs and tissues of the body are not receiving an adequate 
flow of blood. This deprives the organs and tissues of oxygen (carried in the blood) and allows th e 
buildup of waste products. Shock can result in serious damage or even death . 
Aetiology and pathophysiology 
Distributive shock results from excessive vasodilation and the impaired distr ibution of blood flow. Septic 
shock is the most common form of distributive shock and is characterized by considerable mortality 
(treated, around 30%; untreated, probably >80%) . 
Other ca uses of distributive shock include systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) due to 
noninfectious inflammatory conditions such as burns and pancreatitis; toxic shock syndrome (TSS); 
anaphylaxis; reactions to drugs or toxins, including insect bites, transfusion reaction, and heavy metal 
poisoning; addisonian crisis; hepatic insufficiency; and neurogenic shock due to brain or spinal cord 
Types of shock 
 Distributive shock (vasodilation), which is a hyperdynamic process 
 Cardiogenic shock (pump failure) 
 Hypovolemic shock (intravascular volume loss) 
 Obstructive shock (physical obstruction of blood circulation and inadequate blood oxygenation) 
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
The American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Cr itical Care Medicine Consensus Conference 
Committee define d SIRS as the presence of at least 2 of the following 4 criteria : 
Core temperatu re of higher than 38°C or lower than 36°C 
Heart rate of more than 90 beats per minute 
Respiratory rate of more than 20 breaths per minute 
The clinical suspicion of systemic inflammatory response syndrome by an experienced clinician is of 
utmost importance. 
Patients with shock frequently present with tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, altered mental status 
changes, and oliguria. 
Physical Examination 
Cardinal features of dist ributive shock include the following: 
 Change in mental status 
  Heart rate - Greater than 90 beats per minute (note that heart rate elevation is not evident if 
the patient is on a beta blocker) 
 Hypotension - Systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg or a reduction of 40 mm Hg from 
 Respiratory rate - Greater than 20 breaths per minute 
 Extremities - Frequently warm, with bounding pulses and increased pulse pressure (systolic 
minus diastolic blood pressure) in early shock; late shock may present as critical organ 
dysfunction 
 Hyperthermia - Core body temperat ure greater than 38.3°C 
 Hypothermia - Core body te mperate less than 36°C 
 Pulse oximetry - Relative hypoxemia 
 Decreased urine output 
Clinical symptoms of the underlying infections found in dist ributive shock include the following: 
 Pneumonia - Dullness to percussion, rhonchi, crackles, bronchial breath sounds 
 Urinary tract infection - Costovertebral angle tenderness, suprapubic tenderness, dysuria and 
 Intra -abdominal infection or acute abdomen - Focal or diffuse tenderness to palpation, 
diminished or absent bowel sounds, rebound tenderness 
 Gangrene or soft -tissue infection - Pain out of proportion to lesion, skin discoloration and 
ulceration, desquamating rash, areas of subcutaneous ne crosis 
Anaphylaxis is characterized by the following clinical symptoms: 
 Respiratory distress 
 Wheezing 
 Urticarial rash 
 Angioedema 
TSS is characterized by the following clinical symptoms: 
 High fever 
 Diffuse rash with desquamation on the palms and soles over a subsequent 1 -2 weeks 
 Hypotension (may be orthostatic) and evidence of involvement of 3 other organ systems 
Streptococcal TSS more frequently presents with focal soft -tissue inflammation and is less commonly 
associated with diffuse rash. Occasiona lly, it can progress explosively within hours. 
 Adrenal insufficiency is characterized by the following clinical symptoms: 
 Hyperpigmentation of skin, oral, vaginal, and anal mucosal membranes may be present in 
chronic adrenal insufficiency. 
 In acute or acu te-on-chronic adrenal insufficiency brought on by physiologic stress, hypotension 
may be the only physical sign. 
Treatment & Management 
Symptomatic and aetiological treatment must take place simultaneously. 
In all cases : 
Emergency: immediate attention to the patient. 
Warm the patient, lay him flat, elevate legs (except in respiratory distress, acute pulmonary oedema). 
Insert a peripheral IV line using a large calibre catheter (16G in adults). If no IV access, use intraosseous 
Oxygen therapy, assist ed ventilation in the event of respiratory distress. 
Assisted ventilation and external cardiac compression in the event of cardiac arrest. 
Intensive monitoring: consciousness, pulse, BP, CRT, respiratory rate, hourly urinary output (insert a 
urinary cathet er) and skin mottling. 
Management according to the cause 
Haemorrhage 
Control bl eeding . 
Priority: restore vascular volume as quickly as possible: Insert 2 peripheral IV lines 
Ringer Lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride : replace 3 times the estimated losses 
Sever e acute dehydration due to bacterial/viral gastroenteritis 
Urgently restore circulating volume using IV bolus therapy: 
Ringer Lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride : 
Children < 2 months: 10 ml/kg over 15 minutes. Repeat (up to 3 times) if signs of shock persist. 
Children 2 -59 months: 20 ml/kg over 15 minutes. Repeat (up to 3 times) if signs of shock persist. 
Children ≥ 5 years and adults: 30 mg/kg over 30 minutes. Repeat once if signs of shock persist. 
Then, replace the remaining volume deficit using continuous infusion until signs of dehydration resolve 
(typically 70 ml/kg over 3 hours). 
 Closely monitor the p atient; be careful to avoid fluid overload in young children and elderly patients). 
Note : in severely malnourished children the IV rate is different than those for healthy children 
Severe anaphylactic reaction 
Determine the causal agent and remove it, e.g . stop ongoing injections or infusions, but if in place, 
maintain the IV line. 
Administer epinephrine (adrenaline ) IM, into the antero -lateral tight, in the event of hypotension, 
pharyngolaryngeal oedema, or breathing difficulties: 
Use undiluted solution ( 1:1000 = 1 mg/ml) and a 1 ml syringe graduated in 0.01 ml: 
Children under 6 years: 0.15 ml 
Children from 6 to 12 years: 0.3 ml 
Children over 12 years and adults: 0.5 ml 
In children, if 1 ml syringe is not available, use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine to 9 ml of 
0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a 0.1 mg/ml solution (1:10 000): 
Children under 6 years: 1.5 ml 
Children from 6 to 12 years: 3 ml 
At the same time, administer rapidly Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride : 1 litre in adults (maximum 
rate); 20 ml/kg in children, to be repeated if necessary. 
If there is no clinical improvement, repeat IM epinephrine every 5 to 15 minutes. 
In shock persists after 3 IM injections, administration of IV epinephrine at a constant rate by a syringe 
pump is nece ssary: 
Use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine (1:1000) to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a 0.1 
mg/ml solution (1:10 000): 
Children: 0.1 to 1 microgram/kg/minute 
Adults: 0.05 to 0.5 microgram/kg/minute 
Corticosteroids have no effect in th e acute phase. However, they must be given once the patient is 
stabilized to prevent recurrence in the short term: 
hydrocortisone hemisuccinate IV or IM 
Children: 1 to 5 mg/kg/24 hours in 2 or 3 injections 
Adults: 200 mg every 4 hours 
In patients with bron chospasm, epinephrine is usually effective. If the spasm persists give 10 puffs of 
inhaled salbutamol . 
 Septic shock 
Vascular fluid replacement with Ringer Lactate or 0.9 % sodium chloride. 
Use of vasoconstrictors: 
dopamine IV at a constant rate by syringe pump: 10 to 20 micrograms/kg/minute or, if not available 
epinephrine IV at a constant rate by syringe pump: 
Use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine (1:1000) to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a 0.1 
mg/ml solution (1:10 000). Start with 0.1 microgram/kg/minute. 
Increase the dose progressively until a clinical improvement is seen. 
Look for the origin of the infection (abscess; ENT, pulmonary, digestive, gynaecological or urological 
infection etc.). 
Involuntary mo vements of cerebral origin (stiffness followed by clonic movements), accompanied by a 
loss of consciousness, and often urinary incontinence (generalized tonic -clonic seizures). It is important 
to distinguish seizures from ‘pseudo -seizures’ (e.g. in hysteri a or tetany) during which consciousness 
may appear altered but is not lost. 
Priorities : stop the seizures and determine the cause. 
In pregnant women, eclamptic seizures require specific medical and obstetrical care 
Initial treatment 
During a seizure 
Prote ct from trauma, maintain airway, place patient in ‘recovery position’, loosen clothing. 
Most seizures are quickly self -limited. Immediate administration of an anticonvulsant is not systematic. 
If generalized seizure lasts more than 3 minutes, use diazepam to stop it: diazepam 
Children: 0.5 mg/kg preferably rectally1 without exceeding 10 mg. IV administration is possible (0.3 
mg/kg over 2 or 3 minutes), only if means of ventilation are available (Ambu bag and mask). 
Adults: 10 mg slowly IV (or rectally ). 
In all cases: 
• Dilute 10 mg (2 ml) of diazepam in 8 ml of 5% glucose or 0.9% sodium chloride. 
• If convulsion continues, repeat dose once after 5 minutes. 
• In infants and elderly patients, monitor respiration and blood pressure. 
• If convulsion continues af ter the second dose, treat as status epilepticus. 
The patient is no longer seizing 
Look for the cause of the seizure and evaluate the risk of recurrence. 
Keep diazepam and glucose available in case the patient starts seizing again. 
 STATUS EPILEPTICUS 
Status epilepticus (SE) is a common, life -threatening neurologic disorder that is essentially an acute, 
prolonged epilep tic crisis . SE can represent an exacerbation of a preexisting seizure disorder, the initial 
manifestation of a seizure disorder, or an insult other than a seizure disorder. In patients with known 
epilepsy, the most common cause is a change in medication. Most seizures terminate spontaneously. 
By clinical history, nonmotor simple partial status epilepticus involves subjective sensory dist urbances, 
including the following: 
 Focal or unilateral paresthesias or numbness 
 Focal visual changes, usually characterized by flashing lights 
 Focal visual obscuration or focal colorful hallucinations 
 Olfactory or gustatory hallucinations 
 Atypical risi ng abdominal sensations 
Examination for status epilepticus includes the following: 
 Generalized convulsive status epilepticus: Typical rhythmic tonic -clonic activity, impaired 
consciousness; rarely, may present as persistent tonic seizure 
 Status epilepticus due to the use of illicit, or street, drugs: needle -track marks 
 Status epilepticus due to possible mass lesion or brain infection: Papilledema, lateralized 
neurologic features 
 Subtle or transformed status epilepticus: Any patient without imp roving level of consciousness 
within 20 -30 minutes of cessation of generalized seizure activity 
 Associated injuries in patients with seizures: May include tongue lacerations (typically lateral), 
shoulder dislocations, head trauma, facial trauma 
Complicat ions 
Complications of status epilepticus are many. Systemic complications include the following: 
 Hyperthermia 
 Acidosis 
 Hypotension 
 Respiratory failure 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Aspiration 
 Management 
Aggressive treatment is necessary for status epileptics. C linicians should not wait for blood level results 
before administering a loading dose of phenytoin, regardless of whether the patient is already taking 
phenytoin. 
Pharmacotherapy 
Most patients with status epilepticus who are treated aggressively with a ben zodiazepine, fosphenytoin, 
and/or phenobarbital experience complete cessation of their seizures. If status epilepticus does not 
stop, general anesthesia is indicated. 
Medications used in the treatment of status epilepticus include the following: 
 Benzodiaze pines (eg, lorazepam, diazepam, midazolam): First -line agents 
 Anticonvulsant agents (eg, phenytoin, fosphenytoin) 
 Barbiturates (eg, phenobarbital, pentobarbital) 
 Anesthetics (eg, propofol) 
Supportive therapy 
Supportive care in patients with status epil epticus includes the following: 
 Maintenance of vital signs 
 Airway, breathing, circulation (eg, hemodynamic/cardiac monitoring) 
 Respiratory support, with intubation and/or mechanical ventilation if necessary 
 Periodic neurologic assessments 
Protect from trauma, loosen clothing, maintain airway and administer oxygen as required. 
Insert an IV line. 
Both generalized tonic -clonic status epilepticus (SE) and subtle SE must be treated aggressively. 
Maintenance of vital signs, including respiratory function, is of major importance. Any indication of 
respiratory insufficiency should be addressed by intubation. Early treatment measures are performed in 
concert with diagnostic studies. The treating physician should not wait for a blood level to return from a 
laborat ory test before giving the patient a loading dose of phenytoin. The same protocol should be 
followed regardless of whether the patient is already taking phenytoin. Assume that the patient is 
noncompliant because this is the most common cause of SE in patie nts with known epilepsy. 
Prehospital Care 
Supportive care, including ABCs, must be addressed in the prehospital setting. If the seizure fails to stop 
within 4 -5 minutes or if the patient is continuing to seize at the time o f emergency EMS personnel 
arrival , prompt administration of anticonvulsants may be necessary. 
 Because of the refrigeration requirements and the infrequent use of most anticonvulsants, diazepam 
(Valium) is often the only anticonvulsant available in the prehospital setting. Diazepam may be 
administered IV or per rectum. 
Establish intravenous access, ideally in a large vein. Intravenous administration is the preferred route for 
anticonvulsant administration because it allows therapeutic levels to be attained more rapidly. Begin 
cardiac and ot her hemodynamic monitoring. 
Administer a 50 -mL bolus of 50% dextrose IV and 100 mg of thiamine. If seizure activity does not 
terminate within 4 -5 minutes, start anticonvulsant medication. If EMS history has already defined SE, 
treatment should begin immedi ately. In some settings where drug intoxication might be likely, consider 
also adding naloxone at 0.4 -2.0 mg IV to the dextrose bag. 
Administer diazepam (0.15 mg/kg) or lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) IV over 5 minutes, followed by 
fosphenytoin . Fosphenytoin is give n in a dose of 15 -20 mg phenytoin equivalents [PE]/kg, at a rate not 
to exceed 150 mg PE/min). The dose of phenytoin is 18 -20 mg/kg, at a rate not to exceed 50 mg/min). 
Never mix phenytoin with a 5% dextrose solution; put it in a normal saline solution to minimize the risk 
of crystal precipitation. 
Fever is the temporary increase in the body's temperature in response to a disease or illness. 
A child has a fever when the temperature is at or above one of these levels: 
 38°C measured in the bott om (rectally) 
 37.5°C measured in the mouth (orally) 
 37.2°C measured under the arm (axillary) 
An adult probably has a fever when the temperature is above 37.2 - 37.5°C , depending on the time of 
A symptom is something the patient reports and feels, whi le a sign is something other people, including 
a doctor may detect. For example, a headache may be a symptom while a rash may be a sign. 
Whe n somebody has a fever, signs and symptoms are linked to what is known as sickness behavior , and 
may include: 
A person is said to have a fever if the temperature in the mouth is over 37.7C (99.9F). Temperature can 
also be measured in the rectum (anus), un der the arm or inside the ear. 
 Feeling cold when nobody else does 
 Shivering 
 Anorexia 
 Dehydration 
 Depression 
 Hyperalgesia 
 Lethargy 
 Problems concentrating 
 Sleepiness 
 Sweating 
In a febrile patient, first look for signs of serious illness, then try to establish a diagnosis. 
 FEVER WITHOUT A FOCUS 
Infants or young children who have a fever with no obvious source of infection . 
Fever is defined as a rectal temp erature that exceeds 38°C . Direct the initial evaluation of these patients 
toward identifying or ruling out SBI, most commonly urinary tract infections. Meningitis , pneumonia , 
UTI, and bacteremia are serious etiologies of fever in infants and young children . 
Obtaining an accurate history from the parent or caregiver is important when assessing fever without a 
focus; the history obtained should include the following information: 
 Fever history: What was child's temperature prior to presentation and how was temperature 
measured? Consider fever doc umented at home by a reliable parent or caregiver the same as 
fever found upon presentation. Accept parental reports of maximum temperature. 
 Fever at presentation: If the physician believes the infant has been excessively bundled, and if a 
repeat temperat ure taken 15 -30 minutes after unbundling is normal, the infant should be 
considered afebrile. Always remember that normal or low temperature does not preclude 
serious, even life -threatening, infectious disease. 
 Current level of activity or lethargy 
 Activ ity level prior to fever onset (ie, active, lethargic) 
 Current eating and drinking pattern 
 Eating and drinking pattern prior to fever onset 
 Appearance: Fever sometimes makes a child appear rather ill 
 Vomiting or diarrhea 
 Ill contacts 
 Medical history 
 Immunization history (especially recent immunizations) 
 Urinary output: Inquire as to the number of wet diapers 
While performing a complete physical examination, pay particular attention to assessing hydration 
status and identifying the source o f infection. Physical examination of every febrile child should include 
the following: 
Record vital signs. 
 Temperature: Rectal temperature is the standard. Temperature obtained via tympanic, axillary, 
or oral methods may not truly reflect the patient's te mperature. 
  Pulse rate 
 Respiratory rate 
 Blood pressure 
Measure pulse oximetry levels. 
 Pulse oximetry may be a more sensitive predictor of pulmonary infection than respiratory rate 
in patients of all ages, but especially in infants and young children. 
 Pulse oximetry is mandatory for any child with abnormal lung examination findings, respiratory 
symptoms, or abnormal respiratory rate, although keep in mind that the respiratory rate 
increases when children are febrile. 
Record an accurate weight on every c hart. 
 All pharmacologic and procedural treatments are based on the weight in kilograms. 
 In urgent situations, estimating methods (eg, Broselow tape, weight based on age) may be used. 
During the examination, concentrate on identifying any of the following : 
 Toxic appearance, which suggests possible signs of lethargy, poor perfusion, hypoventilation or 
hyperventilation, or cyanosis (ie, shock) 
 A focus of infection that is the apparent cause of the fever 
 Minor foci (eg, otitis media , pharyngitis, sinusitis, skin or soft tissue infection) 
 Identifiable viral infection (eg, bronchiolitis, croup, gingivostomatitis, viral gastroenteritis, 
varicella, hand -foot -and-mouth disease) 
 Petechial or purpuric rashes, often associated with bacteremia 
 Purpura, which is as sociated more often with meningococcemia than is the presence of 
petechiae alone 
For all patients aged 2 -36 months, management decisions are based on the degree of toxicity and the 
identification of serious bacterial infection. 
 The Yale Observatio n Scale is a reliable method for determining degree of illness 
Observation Items 1 (Normal) 3 (Moderate Impairment) 5 (Severe Impairment) 
Quality of cry Strong with normal tone 
or contentment without 
crying Whimpering or sobbing Weak cry, moaning, or high -
pitched cry 
Reaction to parent 
stimulation Brief crying that stops or 
contentment without 
crying Intermittent crying Continual crying or limited 
Color Pink Acrocyanotic or pale 
extremities Pale or cyanotic or mottled 
State variation If awake, stays awake; if 
asleep, wakes up quickly 
upon stimulation Eyes closed briefly while 
awake or awake with 
prolonged stimulation Falls asleep or will not 
Hydration Skin normal, eyes normal, 
and mucous membranes 
moist Skin and eyes normal and 
mouth slightly dry Skin doughy or tented, dry 
mucous membranes, 
and/or sunken eyes 
Response (eg, talk, 
smile) to social 
overtures Smiling or alert (< 2 mo) Briefly smiling or alert 
briefly (< 2 mo) Unsmiling anxious face or 
dull, expressionless, or not 
alert (< 2 mo) 
Medical Care 
For children with fever without a focus who appear ill, conduct a complete evaluation to identify occult 
sources of infection. Follow the evaluation with empiric antibiotic treatment and admit the patient to a 
hospital for furth er monitoring and treatment pending culture results. 
Patients aged 2 -36 months may not require admission if they meet the following criteria: 
 Patient was healthy prior to onset of fever. 
 Patient is fully immunized. 
 Patient has no significant risk factors. 
 Patient appears nontoxic and otherwise healthy. 
 Patient's parents (or caregivers) appear reliable and have access to transportation if the child's 
symptoms should worsen. 
Treatment recommendations for children with fever without a focus are based on the ch ild's 
appearance, age, and temperature. 
 For children who do not appear toxic, treatment recommendations are as follows: 
 Schedule a follow -up appointment within 24 -48 hours and instruct parents to return with the 
child sooner if the condition worsens. 
 Hosp ital admission is indicated for children whose condition worsens or whose evaluation 
findings suggest a serious infection. 
The need to consult with specialists depends on the specialty of the physician who initially evaluated the 
patient and the ultimate s ource of fever. Typically, general pediatricians easily manage febrile infants on 
both an inpatient and outpatient follow -up basis. 
Medication 
Symptomatic treatment 
Undress the patient. 
Antipyretics: 
Paracetamol PO 
Children: 60 mg/kg/day in 3 or 4 divided doses 
Adults: 3 to 4 g/day in 3 or 4 divided doses 
ASA PO (to be avoided in children under 16 years) 
Adults: 1 to 3 g/day in 3 or 4 divided doses 
 AGE 2 MONTHS 1 YEAR 5 YEARS 15 YEARS ADULT 
Weight 4 kg 8 kg 15 kg 35 kg 
Paracetamol 
120 mg/5 ml 
oral solution 
3 to 6 ml x 3 
100 mg tabl et 1/2 tab x 3 3/4 to 1 1/2 
tab x 3 1 1/2 to 3 
500 mg tablet 1/4 to 1/2 
tab x 3 1/2 to 1 1/2 
tab x 3 2 tab x 3 
300 mg tablet 2 tab x 3 
500 mg tablet 1 tab x 3 
 Ibuprofen PO 
Children under 3 months do not administer 
Children over 3 months: 30 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses 
Children over 15 years around 35 kg 200 mg tablet 1 to 2 tab x 3 
Adults: 1200 to 1800 mg/day in 3 to 4 divided doses 
RED FLAG - Caution 
– Paracetamol is the drug of choice for pregnant and breast -feeding women. 
– Acetylsalicylic acid is not recommended during the first 5 months of pregnancy, contra -indicated from 
the beginning of the 6th month, and to be avoided in breastfeeding -women. 
– Ibuprofen is not recommended during the first 5 months of pregnancy and contraindicated from the 
beginning of the 6th month. It can be administered to breastfeeding women as short -term treatment . 
PAIN in ADULTS 
A.- TYPES OF PAIN 
A.1. NOCI CEPTIVE PAIN 
Usual form of pain, acute or chronic. Nervous system without damage. 
B.1.1 Somatic pain : Comes from the skin and deep tissues and is easier to locate than visceral pain: 
musculoskeletal pain, backpain, headache, arthritis. 
B.2.2 Visceral pa in: Comes from the internal organs. Usually dull and vague, and may be harder to 
pinpoint: bladder pain, prostate pain, irritable bowel syndrome, endometriosis, dysmenorrhea, nephritic 
A.2 NEUROPATHIC PAIN 
Less frequent. Nerves have damage. Recurr ent acute attacks of pain such as paresthesia or burning, 
usually with dysesthesia. 
Some forms of pain can be a combination of nociceptive and neuropathic, e.g. some teeth pain. 
B.- TREATMENT 
Oral forms should be used whenever possible 
The combination of different drugs (multimodal analgesia) is adequate (e.g, Paracetamol and NSAIDs; 
Paracetamol and codeine) 
Do not use simultaneously weak and strong opioids 
The dosage and duration of treatment are guided by the assessment of type, intensity and locati on of 
B.1. NOCICEPTIVE PAIN 
WHO PAIN LADDER 
(TREATMENT of NOCICEPTIVE SOMATIC PAIN) 
 1 - 2 Paracetamol /ASA/ NSAIDs 
MODERATE PAIN 3 - 6 As Mild Pain + Weak Opioids (Codeine , 
SEVERE PAIN 7 - 10 As Mild Pain + Stron g Opioids (Morphine, 
 Visceral pain can be treated with the same criteria and drugs than somatic pain. Antispasmodics can also 
be useful. 
GROUP DRUG USUAL DOSAGE 
(Oral) MAX p.d OTHER 
CONSIDERATIONS 
ANTISPASMODIC Hioscine 
Butylbromide 20mg/6h 120mg Side effects: Dry 
mouth, constipation, 
B.2. NEUROPATHIC PAIN 
GROUP DRUG USUAL DOSAGE 
(Oral) MAX p.d OTHER 
CONSIDERATIONS 
ANTIDEPRESSANTS Amitryptiline 10-25 mg/p.d, at 
night. Increase 
doses depending 
on effect 150mg Side effects: Dry mouth, 
constipation. 
C.- SPECIFIC CLINICAL SCENARIOS 
C.1. Mechanic musculoskeletal pain 
Paracetamol or/ and NSAIDs. 
Ointment liniment and heat are useful 
C.2 Acute backpain with neuralgia 
Consider first acute i.m treatment (Diclofena c 75 mg) followed by oral NSAIDs. 
Do not prescribe benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam) 
C.3. Osteoarthritis Pain 
Paracetamol or/and NSAIDs. 
Do not offer glucosamine or chondroitin products. 
Topical NAIDs have proven to be effective in knee and shoulder pai n. 
C.4. Nephritic Colic : 
Diclofenac 75 mg i.m. followed by oral NSAIDs and SPASMOLITICS. 
If nausea or vomiting, metoclopramide 10mg i.m followed by oral intake if needed. 
C.5. Dysmenorrhea : Naproxen 
 Clinical Validation of FLACC: Preverbal Patient Pain Scale 
To examine the difference across time for the FLACC scores, a one -way ANOVA was performed using a 
within factor of measurement time (three time points). Pre -analgesic FLACC scores (Time 1) ranged from 
1-10. Onset of analgesia FLACC scores (Time 2) an d peak analgesia FLACC scores (Time 3) ranged from 0 -
Observational evaluation scale - Children 2 months -5 years 
Each category is scored from 0 to 2, giving a final score between 0 and 10. 
0 to 3 : mild pain, 4 to 7 : moderate pain, 7 to 10 : severe pain 
Observational evaluation scale - Children under 2 months NFCS scale (Neonatal Facial Coding System) 
A score of 2 or more signifies significant pain, requiring analgesic treatment 
 Figure illustrates some of the common facial actions corr esponding to pain in infants. 
 SEVERE ACUTE MALNUTRITION 
Malnutrition is defined by the World Health Organization as a "cellular imbalance between the supply of 
nutrients and energy and the body's demand for them to ensure growth, maint enance, and specific 
functions. Many diseases are directly or indirectly caused by a lack of essential nutrients in the diet. 
Signs and symptoms 
Clinical signs and symptoms of PEM include the following: 
 Poor weight gain 
 Slowing of linear growth 
 Behavior al changes: Irritability, apathy, decreased social responsiveness, anxiety, and attention 
The most common and clinically significant micronutrient deficiencies and their consequences include 
the following: 
 Iron: Fatigue, anemia, decreased cogniti ve function, headache, glossitis, and nail changes 
 Iodine: Goiter, developmental delay, and mental retardation 
 Vitamin D: Poor growth, rickets, and hypocalcemia 
 Vitamin A: Night blindness, xerophthalmia, poor growth, and hair changes 
 Folate - Glossitis , anemia (megaloblastic), and neural tube defects (in fetuses of women without 
folate supplementation) 
 Zinc: Anemia, dwarfism, hepatosplenomegaly, hyperpigmentation and hypogonadism, 
acrodermatitis enteropathica, diminished immune response, and poor wound healing 
Physical examination 
Physical findings that are associated with PEM include the following : 
 Decreased subcutaneous tissue: Areas that are most affected are the legs, arms, buttocks, and 
 Edema: Areas that are most affected are the distal ex tremities and anasarca (generalized 
 Oral changes: Cheilosis, angular stomatitis, and papillar atrophy 
 Abdominal findings: Abdominal distention secondary to poor abdominal musculature and 
hepatomegaly secondary to fatty infiltration 
 Skin changes: Dry, peeling skin with raw, exposed areas; hyperpigmented plaques over areas of 
 Nail changes: Fissured or ridged nails 
 Hair changes: Thin, sparse, brittle hair that is easily pulled out and that turns a dull brown or 
reddish color 
Initial diagnostic laboratory studies include the following: 
 Complete blood count 
 Sedimentation rate 
 Serum electrolytes 
 Urinalysis 
Management 
Children with chronic malnutrition may require caloric intakes of more than 120 -150 kcal/kg/day to 
achieve appropriate weight gain. Most children with mild malnutrition respond to increased oral caloric 
intake and supplementation with vitamin, iron, and folate supplements. The requirement for increased 
protein is met typically by increasing the food intake . 
In moderate to severe cases of malnutrition, enteral supplementation via tube feedings may be 
necessary. 
 CARDIAC EMERGENCIES 
Acute Coronary Syndrome - Adult 
Clinical Note: 
If a patient presents to a general practice during an acute coro nary syndrome, it may be a non -clinical member of 
staff who is their first point of contact. It is therefore important that all staff members are aware of the practice 
protocol for managing patients with unexplained chest pain, and know how to initiate the protocol. 
Staff members should know which room in the practice is the most appropriate to locate patients requiring urgent 
attention. Ideally this room will have an examination bed or couch with clear access on all sides and an ECG 
machine on hand, as we ll as convenient access for ambulance staff and equipment. All staff should be alerted to 
the location and status of the patient, who should not be left unattended. 
If the patient cannot be transported to hospital immediately 
If there will be a significant delay, i.e. more than two hours, in transporting patients with an acute coronary 
syndrome to hospital then it is appropriate to discuss the patient with an emergency medicine consultant or a 
cardiologist who may suggest additional interventions, if the re quired medicines are available. Patients presenting 
in rural areas are most likely to be considered for these additional treatments. 
Person presenting with chest pain 
Stable chest pain Likely to be Non -cardiac 
causes Unstable chest pain 
Assessment, diagnosis 
and immediate 
management of acute 
coronary syndromes 
 Stable angina 
Myocardial infarction 
with ST -segment 
elev ation Early management of 
unstable angina and 
Myocardial infarction secondary prevention 
Include the following information where possible: 
 Time of onset o f symptoms and duration 
 Previous and current ECGs 
 Current blood pressure, heart rate and oxygen saturation levels 
 A list of any medicines given acutely, including time and dose 
 Co-morbidities 
 All medicines currently prescribed as well as any over -the-count er products 
 Allergies 
 Any relevant person details such as an advanced care plan 
 Any relevant family history 
Check immediately if chest pain is current, or when the last episode was, particularly if in the last 12 
hours. Check if the chest pain may be cardiac. Consider: 
 history of the pain 
 any cardiovascular risk factors 
 history of ischaemic heart disease 
 any previous treatment previous investigations for chest pain. 
Initially assess people for any of the following symptoms, which may indicate an acute coronary 
pain in the chest and/or other areas (for example, the arms, back or jaw) lasting longer than 15 minutes chest 
pain with nausea and vomiting, marked sweating or breathlessness (or a combination of these), or with 
haemodynamic in stability new onset chest pain, or abrupt deterioration in stable angina, with recurrent pain 
occurring frequently with little or no exertion and often lasting longer than 15 minutes. Central chest pain 
may not be the main symptom. 
Do not use response to GTN to make a diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. 
Do not assess symptoms of an acute coronary syndrome differently in men and women or among different 
ethnic groups. There are no major differences in symptoms of an acute coronary syndrome among different 
ethnic groups. 
Person presenting with acute chest pain in 
any setting 
Providing information for people 
with chest pain 
Check for a suspected acute 
coronary syndrome 
Making a diagnosis based on clinical assessment 
Anginal pain is: 
 constricting discomfort in the front of the chest, or in the neck, shoulders, 
jaw, or arms 
 precipitated by physical exertion 
 relieved by rest 
Use clinical assessment and the typicality of anginal pain features listed 
below to estimate the likelihood of CAD (see table 1): 
 Three of the features above are defined as typical angina. 
 Two of the three features above are defined as atypical angina. 
 One or none of t he features above are defined as non -anginal chest pain. 
Percentage of people estimated to have coronary artery disease according to typicality of symptoms, 
age, sex and risk factors 
 Non -anginal chest pain Atypical angina Typical angina 
 Men Women Men Women Men Women 
Age (years) Lo Hi Lo Hi Lo Hi Lo Hi Lo Hi Lo Hi 
For men older than 70 with atypical or typical symptoms, assume an estimate > 90%. 
For women older than 70, assume an estimate of 61 –90% EXCEPT women at high risk AND with typical 
symptoms where a risk of > 90% should be assumed. 
Values are per cent of people at each mid -decade age with significant coronary artery disease (CAD) 
Hi = High risk = diabetes, smoking and hyperlipidaemia (total cholesterol > 6.47 mmol/litre). 
Lo = Low risk = none of these three. 
The 'non -anginal chest pain' columns represent people with symptoms of non -anginal chest pain, who would 
not be investigated for stable angina routinely. 
These results are likely to overestimate CAD in primary care populations. 
If there are resting ECG ST -T changes or Q waves, the likelihood of CAD is higher in each cell of the table. 
 Acute coronary syndrome exclude 
Classical Anginal Chest Pain Atypical Chest Pain Anginal Equivalents 
Central Anterior Pain Epigastric discomfort Dyspnea 
Chest Pressure, tightness Musculoskeletal Syncope 
Crushing Pain Often Unilateral “Generally Weak” 
Pain radiating to arms, neck and back Nausea/Vomiting Palpitations 
Unless clinical suspicion is raised based on other aspects of the history and risk factors, exclude a 
diagnosis of stable angina if the pain is non -anginal. Other features which make a diagnosis of stable 
angina unlikely are when the chest pain is: 
 continuous or very prolonged and/or 
 unrelated to activity and/or 
 brought on by breathing in and/or 
 associated with symptoms such as dizziness, palpitations, tingling or difficulty swallowing. 
 Consider causes of chest pain other than angina (such as gastrointestinal or musculoskeletal 
Offer pain relief as soon as possible . This may be achieved with GTN (sublingual or buccal), but offer 
intravenous opioids such as morph ine, particularly if an acute myocardial infarction is suspected. 
Offer people a single loading dose of 324 mg aspirin as soon as possible unless there is clear evidence that 
they are allergic to it. 
If aspirin is given before arrival at hospital, send a w ritten record that it has been given with the person. 
Do not routinely administer oxygen , but monitor oxygen saturation using pulse oximetry as soon as 
possible, ideally before hospital admission. Only offer supplemental oxygen to: 
people with oxygen satu ration (SpO 2) of less than 94% who are not at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure, 
aiming for SpO 2 of 94 –98% people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who are at risk of 
hypercapnic respiratory failure, to achieve a target SpO2 of 88 –92% until blood gas analysis is available. 
Take a resting 12 -lead ECG as soon as possible . When people are referred, send the results to hospital 
before they arrive if possible. Recording and sending the ECG should not delay transfer to hospital. 
A number of chang es on a resting 12 -lead ECG are consistent with CAD and may indicate ischaemia or previous 
infarction. These include: 
 pathological Q waves in particular 
 ST-segment and T wave abnormalities (for example, flattening or inversion). 
Note that the result s may not be conclusive. Immediate managemen t of a 
suspected acute coronary 
Consider any resting 12 -lead ECG changes together with people's clinical history and risk factors. 
If a ST segment elevation is detected, the patient should be immediately referred to hospital , as in these patients 
Monitor people with acute chest pain, using clinical judgement to decide how often this should be 
done, until a firm diagnosis is made. This should include : 
 exacerbations of pain and/or other symptoms 
 pulse and blood pressure 
 heart rhythm 
 oxygen saturation by pulse o ximetry 
 repeated resting 12 -lead ECGs 
 checking pain relief is effective. 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
Aspirin 324 mg. Check allergy status. Check contraindications. 
Nitroglycerin Give glyceryl trinitrate 0.4 mg sublingual or equivalent every 5 min up to 3 doses as SBP 
allows. Begin IV dosing at 10 micro -grams min −1 in persistent pain or pulmonary edema; titrate to desired BP 
effect. IV must be established before administration of nitroglycerin 
Must be patient’s own NTG 
SBP must be > 100mmHg 
Oxygen treatment should not be routinely administered. DO NOT administer oxygen to patients with an ST 
elevation acute coronary syndrome unless they: 
 Are breathless 
 Are hypoxic, i.e. oxygen saturation < 93% 
 Have heart failure 
 Are in card iogenic shock 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
NOTE : A second IV line may be indicated for high -risk patient. 
Medication interventions based on risk for ACS, clinical presentation and/or diagnostic EKG changes. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
 Additional doses of above medications 
 Intravenous (IV) morphine is effective for severe pain in a patient with an acute coronary syndrome. For 
example, give morphine 5 -10 mg IV at 1 –2 mg/minute, repeat if necessary; morphine 2.5 – 5 mg for older 
or frail patients. 
 An IV antiemeti c, e.g. metoclopramide 10 mg or cyclizine 25 mg, is usually administered at the same time 
as, or immediately prior to, IV morphine. 
 Dispersible aspirin 324 mg, should be given to all patients with an acute coronary syndrome, including 
those already taking aspirin; if enteric coated aspirin is the only formulation available the patient should 
chew the tablet. Treatment with aspirin in all patients unless there are contraindications. 
 Clopidogrel 300 mg (75 mg for patients aged over 75 years) given immediatel y along with aspirin, is 
recommended for patients with an acute coronary syndrome who also have evidence of ischaemia on ECG 
N.B. Clopidogrel may not be routinely available in general practices as it is not able to be obtained under 
a Practitioner’s Suppl y Order 
 RED FLAG - Caution 
Avoid nitroglycerin in ALL patients who have used a phosphodiesterase inhibitor such as: sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil 
(Levitra), tadalafil (Cialis) within the last 48 HOURS . These medications are often used for erectile dysf unction and 
pulmonary hypertension. Also avoid use in patients receiving intravenous epoprostenol (Flolan) which is also used for 
pulmonary hypertension. 
Administer nitrates with extreme caution, if at all, to patients with inferior -wall STEMI or suspecte d right 
ventricular (RV) involvement because these patients require adequate RV preload. 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
12-Lead ECG 
STEMI Non-Diagnostic 12 -Lead 
Vascular Access A A Vascular Access 
Oxygen Keep SpO2 >94% 
 E Oxygen Keep SpO2 >94% 
ASPIRIN 324 mg PO E 
NITROGLYCERIN NITROGLYCERIN 
Assist pt with own NTG as 
prescribed; may repeat x 3 E Assist pt with own NTG as 
prescribed; may repeat x 3 E 
0.4 mg SL; may repeat q 5 min 
x 3 0.4 mg SL; may repeat q 5 min 
Pain Management for 
continued pain Pain Management for 
continued pain Nitroglycerin is contraindicated 
in any patie nt with 
hypotension, bradycardia, 
tachycardia (HR >100 bpm) in 
the absence of heart failure, 
and evidence of a right 
ventricular infarction. Caution is 
advised in patients with Inferior 
Wall STEMI and a right -sided 
ECG should be performed to 
evaluate RV in farction . 
Consider Anti -emetic for 
nausea/vomiting: ONDANSETRON 
4.0 mg ODT/IM/IV 
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME 
ASPIRIN 324 mg PO E 
 P P 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
12-Lead ECG P 
Non -Specific Chest Pain Suspected Aortic Dissection Suspected Cardiac Origin 
Oxygen Keep SpO2 >94% 
 Oxygen Keep SpO2 >94% 
 E E Acute Coronary 
Syndrome (Suspect ed) 
 Consider Vascular 
 A Vascular Access 
N/S 500 ml bolus; 
may repeat up to 2000 ml 
for hypotension A 
 Cons ider ALBUTEROL for 
constricted airways 
2.5 mg SVN A 
 Consider Pain 
Management 
Pain Management 
CHEST PAIN 
 Medications 
 Past medical history (MI, angina, diabetes, post 
menopausal) 
 Allergies 
 Recent physical exertion 
 Palliation/Provocation 
 Quality (crampy, constant, sharp, dull, etc.) 
 Region/ Radiation/Referred 
 Time (onset/duration/repetition) Signs and Symptoms 
 CP (pressure, pain, ache, vicelike tightness) 
 Location (substernal, epigastric, arm, jaw, 
neck, shoulder) 
 Diaphoresis 
 Shortness of breath 
 Nausea, vomiting, dizzy 
 Time of onset 
 ATRIAL FIBRILLATION/FLUTTER 
Management of atrial fibrillation in general practice 
In people diagnosed with AF, there are two separate but equally important issues that must be considered. These 
 Symptom management 
 Assessment and manage ment of thromboembolic risk 
A stepwise approach to management is recommended 
1. Confirm the diagnosis with ECG 
2. Consider if urgent referral to secondary care is required 
3. Determine the type of AF (e.g. persistent, paroxysmal or permanent) 
4. Symptom management 
5. Assess stroke risk to determine if antithrombotic treatment is required 
Typical symptoms include 
Identify the presen ce of the following symptoms: 
A. Palpitations 
B. Dyspnea 
C. Dizziness, presyncope, or syncope 
D. Chest pain 
E. Weakness or fatigue 
 STEP 1: How s ymptomatic is 
the patient? THE DIAGNOSIS OF AF CAN BE 
CONFIRMED WITH AN ECG. 
Check when the symptoms started, how often they occur and how long they last. 
Functionality 
Determine if the sy mptoms associated with AF (or the treatment of AF) affect the patient’s 
functionality (subjective quality of life). 
The CCS -SAF Scale: 
Class Definition 
0 Asymptomatic with respect to AF. 
Symptoms attributable to AF have minimal effect on patient’s general quality of life: 
1 • minimal and/or infrequent symptoms; or 
• single episode of AF without syncope or heart failure. 
Symptoms attributable to AF have minor effect on patient’s general quality of life: 
2 • mild awareness of symptoms in patients with persistent/permanent AF; or 
• rare episodes (e.g., less than a few per year) in patients with paroxysmal or intermittent AF. 
Symptoms attributable to AF have moderate effect on patient’s general quality of life: 
3 • moderate awareness of symptoms on most days in patients with persistent/permanent AF; or • more frequent episodes (e.g., more than every few months) or more severe symptoms, or 
both, in patients with paroxysmal or intermittent AF. 
Symptoms attributable to AF have severe effect on patient’s general quality of life: 
• very unpleasant symptoms in patients with persistent/paroxysmal AF; and/or 
4 • frequent and highly symptomatic episodes in patients with paroxysmal or intermittent AF; 
and/or syncope thought to be due to A F; and/or congestive heart failure secondary to AF 
Consider referral to the emergency department or start acute management if highly symptomatic 
The majority of people presenting with symptoms consistent with new onset AF will not be haemodynamica lly 
compromised, however, urgent referral to secondary care for possible cardioversion is required if the patient has: 
 A pulse rate > 150 beats per minute or a systolic blood pressure of < 90 mmHg 
 Chest pain, increasing shortness of breath, severe dizzines s or loss of consciousness (includes patients 
with acute ischaemic changes on ECG) 
 Any complications of AF such as TIA, stroke, acute ischaemia or acute heart failure 
 STEP 2 : Functionality 
STEP 3 : Refer for or start 
acute management if 
hemodynamically unstable 
 Probable paroxysmal AF (as this requires medicines not usually initiated in primary care such as 
amiodarone or sotalol) 
 ECG abnormalities such as Wolff -Parkinson -White syndrome or prolonged QT interval 
 Known or suspected valvular disease 
 Ongoing symptoms despite appropriate rate control treatment 
The three types of AF are: 
 Paroxysm al AF – characterised by recurrent episodes of AF that last less than seven days (although often 
less than 24 hours) and resolve spontaneously within that time. Rhythm control is the preferred 
treatment. 
 Persistent AF – characterised by episodes of AF that last more than seven days and that has not 
spontaneously resolved within this time. Treatment is rate or rhythm control depending on the individual 
patient situation. 
 Permanent AF – AF that has been present for more than one year and cardioversion has fai led or not 
been attempted. Rate control is preferred. 
ENOXAPARIN 1 mg/kg twice daily 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
 Routine Patient Care 
(e.g., CCS -SAF ≤ 3, minimal to moderate effects on patient’s quality of life) and hemodynamically stable (systolic 
blood pressure > 90 mmHg, a heart rate < 120 beats per minute (BPM) and without clinical signs of shock). 
 STEP 5 : Determine the type 
of AF STEP 4 : Referral to or discussion 
with a cardiologist is 
recommended if the patient has: 
STEP 6 : Start rate/rhythm 
control if not highly 
symptomatic In th e absence of 
contraindications, offer 
heparin at initial presentation 
Symptom management 
Rate or rhyth m control? The choice between rate or rhythm control is guided by the type of AF and other factors 
such as age, the presence of co -morbidities, the presence or absence of symptoms and patient preference. 
Rate control is recommended for the majority of pati ents. It should be considered in particular for patients with: 
 Asymptomatic AF 
 Permanent AF 
Rhythm control , which aims to restore and maintain sinus rhythm, should be considered for patients with: 
 Paroxysmal AF 
 Persistent AF and ongoing symptoms, any h aemodynamic compromise, failure of rate control or 
persistent symptoms despite rate control 
 Structural heart disease, e.g. severe left ventricular dysfunction or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (AF is 
usually not well tolerated in these patients) 
Rate cont rol medicines used in atrial fibrillation 
Co-morbidity First line Second line Third line Fourth line 
No heart disease 
Beta - blockers 
(not sotalol) Calcium channel blockers Digoxin 
Amiodarone 
 Hypertension 
Ischaemic heart 
Congestive hea rt 
failure Metoprolol or 
carvedilol Digoxin Diltiazem 
COPD Calcium channel 
blockers Beta - blockers 
(provided no significant reversible 
bronchospasm) Digoxin 
As a guide, target heart rate should be ≤ 80 beats per minute at rest and ≤ 115 beats per min ute with moderate 
walking STEP 7 : Any concerns about a strategy of 
rate control for a particular patient can be 
discussed with a cardiologist. 
All p atients for whom a rhythm control strategy 
is contemplated should be referred to a 
cardiologist . 
Assess thromboembolic risk and stroke risk to determine appropriate antithrombotic treatment 
CHA 2DS 2-VASc Score 
Congestive heart failure/LV dysfunction 1 
Hypertension 1 
Age ≥ 75 years 2 
Diabetes mellitus 1 
Stroke/TIA 2 
Vascular disease (prior MI, peripheral vascular disease) 1 
Age 65 –75 years 1 
Sex category (i.e. female gender) 1 
Maximum score 9 
N.B. Maximum score is 9 as age is either allocated one or two points 
If the CHADS 2 score is ≥ 2, the patient should be a nticoagulated. If a patient has a CHADS 2 score of less 
than 2, CHA 2DS 2-VASc can be used to further evaluate risk and to guide treatment choice. 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
If the patient’s systolic blood pressure is unstable (less than 100 mm Hg, with signs of hypoperfusion ): 
In Atrial Fibrillation, synchronized cardioversion at 200 J, 300J, and 360 J or the equivalent biphasic 
values as per manufacturer). 
In Atrial Flutter, synchronized cardioversion beginning at 50J. 
Check rhythm and pulse between each attempted cardioversion. 
If Cardioversion is warranted, consider use of Sedation for Electrical Therapies . 
Diltiazem HCL 
Heart rate greater than 150 and patient stable but symptomatic: 
Initial bolus: 0.25 mg/kg slow IV over two (2) minutes . 
If inadequate response after 15 minutes, re -bolus 0.35 mg/kg SLOW IV over two (2) minutes . 
CONTRAINDICATIONS : Wolff -Parkinson -White Syndrome, second or third degree heart block and sick sinus 
syndrome (except in the presence of a ventricular pace maker), severe hypote nsion or cardiogenic shock. 
Heart rate less than 150 and patient stable but symptomatic: 
Contact Medical Control. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Amiodarone 150 mg Slow IV/IO over 10 minutes. 
Metoprolol : maintenance: 25 -100 mg PO q12hr 
Flecainide : 50 mg PO BID; do not exceed 300 mg/day 
Propafenone : 150 mg PO q8hr; 
 BRADY CARDIA -ADULT 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
 Routine Patient Care. 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
If patient is symptomatic (such as altered mental status or ischemia) 
Atropine Sulfate 0.5 mg IV every three (3) to five (5) minutes up to total dose 3 mg may be considered 
while waiting for pacer set -up. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Norepinephrine infusion: 0.1mcg/kg/min IV via pump, titrate to goal Systolic Blood Pressure of 
90mmHg, OR 
Dopamine 2-20 mcg/k g/min IV 
Epinephrine Infusion 1-10 mcg/min IV 
For example: mix 1mg of Epinephrine 1:1000 in 250mL of Normal Saline, (15 micro drops/minute = 1 
mcg / min.) 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
 BRADYCARDIA -PEDIATRIC 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
If pu lse is less than 60 in a child, AND the patient is severely symptomatic , consider starting 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR). 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
If patient is severely symptomatic: 
Epinephrine 1:10,000, 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO (max. dose 0.5 mg) or, 
Atropine 0.02 mg/kg IV (min. single dose 0.1 mg, max. single dose 1 mg). If increased vagal tone or AV block 
suspected. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Additional fluid boluses (10 -20mL/kg) 
Epinephrine 1:10,000 – 0.01-0.03 mg/kg IV (max. single dose of 0.5 mg) 
Epinephrine Infusion 1:1,000, 0.1 -1 mcg/kg/min IV 
For example , mix 1mg of Epinephrine 1:1000 in 250mL of Normal Saline, (15 micro drops/minute = 1 mcg / 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
 Vascular Access 
Cardiac monitor/12 -Lead ECG P 
 Acute Coronary 
Consider: ATROPINE 0.5 mg 
IVP; may repeat q 3 -5 min; max 
dose 3.0 mg P 
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
HOSPIT AL Consider: ATROPINE 0.5 mg 
IVP; may repeat q 3 -5 min; max 
dose 3.0 mg P 
Consider: DOPAMINE 
5-10 mcg/kg/min IV; titrate to 
SBP100 mmHg; max dose 20 
mcg/kg/min P 
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
ECG shows STEMI 
 NO Signs of 
 hypotension, 
AMS, shock 
 Refractory 
BRADYCARDIA 
HR <50 bpm & ANY o f the following: 
1. Hypoperfusion 
2. Altered mental status 
3. Signs of shock 
Observe Transport 
 Bradycardia causing symptoms is typically <50/minute. Rhythm should be interpreted in the 
context of symptoms and pharmacological treatment given only when symptomatic, otherwise 
monitor and reassess. 
 Identifying signs and symptoms of poor perfusion caused by bradycardia are paramount. 
 Do not delay pacing while waiting for IV access. 
 Do not delay immediately transport to the hospital 
 Hypoxemia is a common cause of bradycardia; be sure to oxygenate the patient and provide 
ventilatory support as needed. 
QI Metrics 
 High degree blocks correctly identified. 
 Pacer pads on patient if Atropine given. 
 GENERAL PEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT 
Ventilation Management 
 NO YES 
PEDIATRIC BRADYCARDIA 
Bradycardia causing 
hypotension, 
 altered mental status, 
poor perfusion or 
Identify underlying cause Identify underlying cause 
Blood glucose testing E
 Blood glucose testing E
Consider Vascular Access 
 Vascular Access 
Cardiac monitor Cardiac monitor A
Overdose/Poisoning 
Monitor, Reassess, Transport 
to Pediatric Facility HR <60 bpm? 
 NS bolus 20 ml/kg; A may 
repeat up to 60 ml/kg A
 EPINEPHRINE 1:10,000 
0.01 mg/kg IV/IO 1:1000 
0.1 mg via ETT (max 1.0 
mg); repeat q 3-5 min 
 EPINEPHRINE 1:10,000 
0.01 mg/kg IV/IO 1:1000 
0.1 mg via ETT (max 1.0 
mg); repeat q 3-5 min 
 ATROPINE 0.02 mg/kg 
IV/IO (min dose 0.1 mg; 
max 0.5 mg) may repeat 
once after 5 min ATROPINE 0.02 mg/kg 
IV/IO (min dose 0.1 mg; 
max 0.5 mg) may repeat 
once after 5 min 
Notify Receiving Hospital Cardiac Arrest 
 Recommended Exam: Mental Status, HEENT, Heart, Lung, Neuro. 
 Bradycardia causing symptoms is typically <50/minute. Rhythm should be i nterpreted in the context 
of symptoms and pharmacological treatment given only when symptomatic; otherwise, monitor and 
 Identifying signs and symptoms of poor perfusion caused by bradycardia are paramount. 
 Hypoxemia is a common cause of bradycard ia; be sure to oxygenate the patient and provide 
ventilatory support as needed. 
 CARDIAC ARREST (ADULT): ASYSTOLE/PULSELESS ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY 
EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
EARLY DEFIBRILLATION. 
Perform CPR until AED device is attached and operable. 
Use AED according to Emergency Cardiovascular Care (ECC) Guidelines or as otherwise noted in these 
protocols and other advisories. 
Resume CPR when appropriate. 
EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Consider underlying causes for Asystole/PEA ( Pulseless Electrical Activity) 
At all times, minimize interruptions of chest compressions, especially during IV placement. 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Verify Asystole in 2 leads, if possible. 
Consider and treat underlying causes for Asystole/PEA: 
If cause is unknown and Asystole/PEA persists: 
Epinephrine 1:10,000 1 mg IV every 3 -5 minutes; may substitute Vasopressin 40 UNITS IV in place of 
first or second dose of epinephrine 1:10,000. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications. 
Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV 
Atropine 1 mg IV, repeated to max dose 3 mg. 
REVERSIBLE CAUSES OF CARDIAC ARREST INCLU DE: 
Hypothermia: initiate 2 large bore IVs (warm) normal saline 
Hyperkalemia: Contact Medical Control 
Hypoxia: p rovide high flow oxygen 
Hypovolemia: 250mL fluid bolus. 
Hydrogen Ion/Acidosis: Contact Medical Control 
Toxins/Tablets: see Toxicology protocol 
Thrombus (Coronary/Pulmonary): Contact Medical Control 
Tension Pneumothorax: Contact Medical Control. 
Tamponade ( Pericardial): Contact Medical Control 
Tension Pneumothorax: Contact Medical Control. 
Tamponade (Pericardial): Contact Medical Control 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
 CARDIAC ARREST (PEDIATRIC): ASYSTOLE/PULSELESS ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care —with focus on CPR 
Ventilate with 100% oxygen 
If unable to ventilate child after repositioning of airway: assume upper airway obstruction and follow 
Pediatric Upper Airway Obstruction Protocol. 
EARLY DEFIBRILLATION 
Use AED according to t he guidelines of the ECC or as otherwise noted in these protocols and other 
advisories 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Consider treating for reversible causes. 
Epinephrine : 
o For Bradycardia : 0.01 mg/kg (1:10,000) IV every 3 -5 minutes. 
o For Asystole or PEA: 0.01 mg/kg (1:10,000) IV every 3 -5 minutes. 
Epinephrine infusion: initial dose, 0.1 mcg/kg/min IV. Titrate to desired effect to maximum dose of 1 
mcg/kg/min. 
For example , mix 1mg of Epinephrine 1:1000 in 250mL of Normal Saline, (15 micro drops/minute = 1 
mcg / min.) 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications. 
Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV 
Atropine 0.02mg/kg IV (minimum single dose 0.1mg, maximum combined doses 1 mg.) 
All other treatment modalities based on suspected etiology for cardiop ulmonary arrest. 
Note: REVERSIBLE CAUSES OF CARDIAC ARREST INCLU DE: 
Hypothermia: initiate 2 large bore IVs (warm) normal saline 
Hyperkalemia: Contact Medical Control 
Hypoxia: provide high flow oxygen 
Hypovolemia: 250mL fluid bolus. 
Hydrogen Ion/Acidosis: Contact Medical Control 
Toxins/Tablets: see Toxicology protocol 
Thrombus (Coronary/Pulmonary): Contact Medical Control 
Tension Pneumothorax: Perform needle chest decompression. 
Tamponade (Pericardial): Contact Medical Control 
 CARDIAC ARREST (ADUL T): VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION/PULSELESS VENTRICULAR 
TACHYCARDIA 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
Perform CPR until defibrillator is attached and operable. 
Use AED according to the ECC guidelines or as otherwise noted in these protoc ols and other advisories 
Resume CPR when appropriate. 
ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Minimize interruptions of chest compressions for IV placement. 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Document presenting cardiac rhythm in two separate leads, if possible. 
Defibrillati on when available, with minimum interruption in chest compressions (use 360 joules for 
monophasic and 120 – 200 joules for biphasic defibrillators); then CPR for 5 cycles/2 minutes; then 
rhythm check; Charge defibrillator while performing chest compression s to minimize hands -off-time. 
Consider Epinephrine (1:10,000) 1mg IV; repeat every 3 – 5 minutes. May substitute Vasopressin 40 
units IV in place of first or second dose of epinephrine 1:10,000. 
Continue CPR and defibrillate (each shock at 360J monophasic equivalent) per ECC guidelines if 
ventricular fibrillation/ventricular tachycardia is persistent. 
Consider Amiodarone 300 mg slow IV push. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV. 
Magnesium Sulfate 1 – 2 grams IV over 5 minutes, in torsades de pointes or suspected 
hypomagnesemic state or refractory ventricular fibrillation/ventricular tachycardia. 
Amiodarone 150 mg. slow IV if one dose already given or 300 mg slow IV if not already given. 
Lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg IV; subsequent dosage: 0.5 to 0.75 mg/kg IV every 3 – 5 minutes to a total dose of 
3 mg/kg IV. 
The need for early defibrillation is clear and should have the highest priority. Since these patients will all be 
in cardiopulmonary arrest, use of adjunctive equipment should not divert attention or effort from Basic 
Cardiac Life Support (BCLS) resuscitative measures, early defibrillation and Advanced Cardiac Life Support 
(ACLS). Remember: rapid defibrillation and high quality CPR is the major de terminant of survival. 
Early CPR and early defibrillation are the most effective therapies for cardiac arrest care. 
Minimize interruptions in chest compression, as pauses rapidly return the blood pressure to zero and 
stop perfusion to the heart and brain. 
Switch compressors at least every two minutes to minimize fatigue. 
Perform “hands on defibrillation.” 
o Compress when charging and resume compressions immediately after the shock is delivered. 
Do not hyperventilate as it increases intrathoracic pr essure and decreases blood return to the heart. 
Ventilate at a rate of 8 – 10 breaths per minutes, with enough volume to produce adequate chest rise. 
 CARDIAC ARREST (PEDIATRIC): VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION/PULSELESS VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA 
EMT/EMT -INTERME DIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care —with focus on high quality CPR 
Apply AED and use as soon as possible (with minimum interruption of chest compressions). From birth 
to age 8 years use pediatric AED pads. 
If pediatric AED pads are unav ailable, providers may use adult AED pads, provided the pads do not 
If unable to ventilate child after repositioning of airway, assume upper airway obstruction and follow 
Pediatric Upper Airway Obstruction Protocol. 
Consider treatable causes 
PARA MEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Defibrillate once at 2 -4J/kg. 
Epinephrine : 0.01mg/kg IV (1:10,000, 0.1mL/kg); repeat every 3 -5 minutes. 
Defibrillate 4 -10 J/kg (do not exceed 10J/kg) every 2 minutes. 
Amiodarone 5 mg/kg IV 
Defibrillate 4 J/kg 30 -60 seconds after each medication. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV. 
All other treatment modalities based upon suspected cause of VT/FT. 
The need for early defibrillation is clear and should have the highest p riority. Since these patients will all be 
in cardiopulmonary arrest, use of adjunctive equipment should not divert attention or effort from Basic 
Cardiac Life Support (BCLS) resuscitative measures, early defibrillation and Advanced Cardiac Life Support 
(ACLS). Remember: rapid defibrillation and high quality CPR is the major determinant of survival. 
Early CPR and early defibrillation are the most effective therapies for cardiac arrest care. 
Minimize interruptions in chest compression, as pauses rapi dly return the blood pressure to zero and 
stop perfusion to the heart and brain. 
Switch compressors at least every two minutes to minimize fatigue. 
Perform “hands on defibrillation.” 
o Compress when charging and resume compressions immediately after the sh ock is delivered. 
Do not hyperventilate as it increases intrathoracic pressure and decreases blood return to the heart. 
Ventilate at an appropriate rate, with enough volume to produce adequate chest rise. 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
 Meet s criteria for 
Prehospital Death 
If witnessed by EMS or CPR in progress and 
patient is unresponsive with no pulse, begin 
Continuous Chest Compressions (CCC) Push 
hard, Push fast (≥100/min) If unwitnessed by EMS or 
no CPR in progress 
perform 2 min of CCC 
 A A 
 YES NO 
CARDIAC ARREST (NON -TRAUMATIC) (ADULT CCC CPR) 
 E Apply AED and defibrillate 
 E Insert NPA or OPA and begin 
BVM at 8 BPM 
Apply cardiac monitor P 
Rhythm shockable? VF/VT P P Asystole/PEA 
Defibrillate P 
Continue CPR for 2 min E 
Rhythm shockable? 
Defibrillate if prompted 
Defibrillate P 
Continue CPR for 2 min E 
EPINEPHRINE 
1.0 mg IV/IO q 3 -5 min 
ETT Administration 
requires 2 to 2.5 times 
the dose P Use Asys tole/PEA side as indicated 
Check pulse, if organized rhythm 
 If patient remains unresponsive to 
resuscitation efforts, consider 
Termination of Resuscitation Protocol 
Continue CPR for 2 min E 
 Vascular Access 
EPINEPHRINE 
1.0 mg IV/IO q 3 -5 min 
ETT Administration 
requires 2 to 2. 5 times 
the dose P 
Consider Extraglottic 
Airway Device 
Endotracheal Intubation 
 P Vascular Access 
 YES NO 
 Efforts should be directed at high quality and continuous compressions with limited interuptions 
and early defibrillation when indicated. 
 Consider early IO placement if IV is difficult. 
 DO NOT HYPERVENTILATE. 
 Reassess and document ETT placem ent using auscultation and ETCO 2 capnography. 
 Switch compressors every two minutes. 
 Try to maintain patient modesty. 
 Mechanical chest compression devices should be used if available in order to provide for 
consistent uninterrupted chest compressions and cr ew safety. 
H’s & T’s (reversible causes) 
 Hypovolemia – Volume infusion 
 Hypoxia – Oxygenation & ventilation, CPR 
 Hydrogen ion (acidosis) – Ventilation, CPR 
 Hypo/Hyperkalemia – Calcium Chloride, Glucose, Sodium Bicarbonate, Albuterol 
 Hypothermia ‐ Warming 
 Tension pneumothorax – Needle decompression 
 Tamponade, cardiac – Volume infusion 
 Toxins – Agent specific antidote 
 Thrombosis, pulmonary – Volume infusion 
 Thrombosis, coronary – Emergent PCI Consider Extraglottic 
Airway Device 
Endotracheal Intub ation 
Rhythm shockable? 
Defibrillate if prompted 
Defibrillate P 
Continue CPR for 2 min E 
AMIODARONE 
300 mg IV/IO; may 
repeatone dose of 150 
mg if refractory after 
5th shock; Address H’s 
& T’s P Rhythm shockable? 
Continue CPR for 2 min E 
Rhythm shockable? 
Use VF/VT side as 
indicated Use Asystole/PEA side as indicated 
Check pulse, if organized rhythm 
 If patient remains unresponsive to 
resuscitation efforts, consider 
Termination of Resuscitation Protocol 
 GENERAL PEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT 
 YES NO 
CARDIAC ARREST NON -TRAUMATIC PEDIATRIC 
Meets Criteria for Prehospital Death 
Determination or DNR/POLST present? Refer to Termination of 
Resuscitation or DNR Protocol as 
Appropriate 
IF HYPOXIA IS THE CAU SE OF THE ARREST, EARLY 
VENTILATION IS RECOMMENDED 
Begin Age Appropriate CPR Push Hard (4 cm Infant 5 
cm in Children) Push Fast (≥ 100/min) 
Apply AED and Defib if Prompted E
 Apply Cardiac Monitor P
Rhythm Shockable? 
 Defibrillate at 2 J/kg P
Continue CPR for 2 Minutes E
 IV Access A
Rhythm Shocka ble? 
Defibrillate I Prompted(AED) E
 Defibrillate at 4 J/kg Not To 
Exceed Adult Dose P
Continue CPR for 2 Minutes E
EPINEPHRINE 0.01 mg/kg 
1:10,000 IV or 0.1 mg/kg 
1:1,000 ETT Every 3 -5 Minutes P
Rhythm Shockable? Asystole/PEA P
Continue CPR for 2 Minutes E
 IV Access A
EPINEPHRINE 0.01 mg/kg 
1:10,000 IV or 0.1 mg/kg 
1:1,000 ETT Every 3 -5 Minutes P
Rhythm Shockable? 
Continue CPR for 2 Minutes E
Address H’s & T’s P
Rhythm Shockable? 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE 
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO 
HOSPITAL YES YES 
H’s & T’s (reversible causes) 
Hypovol emia – Volume infusion 
Hypoxia – Oxygenation & ventilation, CPR 
Hydrogen ion (acidosis) – Ventilation, CPR 
Hypo/Hyperkalemia – Calcium Chloride, Glucose, Sodium Bicarbonate, Albuterol 
Hypothermia ‐ Warming 
Tension pneumothorax – Needle decompression 
Tamponade, cardiac – Volume infusion 
Toxins – Agent specific antidote 
Thrombosis, pulmonary – Volume infusion 
Thrombosis, coronary – Emergent PCI 
 Defibrillate I Prompted(AED) E
 Defibrillate at 4 J/kg Not To 
Exceed Adult Dose P
Continue CPR for 2 Minutes E
AMIODARONE 5 mg/kg IV 
May Repeat Once After 5th 
Shock Address H’s & T’s P
 Use VF/VT Side as Indicated 
Use Asystole/PEA Side as Indicated 
Check Pulse if Organized Rhythm 
If Patient Remains Unresponsive to 
Resuscitation Efforts Consider Termination 
of Resuscitation Protocol 
 SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA — ADU LT 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Vagal Maneuvers: Valsalva’s and/or cough. 
If Systolic BLOOD PRESSURE is unstable (less than 100mm Hg): Synchronized cardioversion at 50 J, 100 
J, 200 J, 300 J and 360 J or the equivalent biphasic values as per manufacturer. Check rhythm and pulse 
between each attempted cardioversion. 
If cardioversion is warranted, consider Sedation for Electrical Therapy 
Adenosine 6 mg rapid IV over 1 -3 seconds. If previous dose failed to resolve rhythm disturbance, 
Adenosine 12mg rapid IV over 1 -3 seconds. Repeat Adenosine 12 mg rapid IV over 1 -3 seconds if 
previous doses failed to resolve rhythm disturbance. 
Note: Follow all Adenosine with a 20 mL normal saline bolus an d elevate extremity. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Administration of Diltiazem HCL: 
Initial bolus: 0.25 mg/kg IV over two (2) minutes. 
If inadequate response after 15 minutes, re-bolus 0.35 mg/kg IV over two (2) minutes. 
CONTRAINDICATIONS : Wolff -Parkinson -White Syndrome, second or third degree heart block and sick sinus 
syndrome (except in the presence of a ventricular pace maker), severe hypotension or cardiogenic shock. 
Amiodarone 150 mg IV slowly over 10 minutes. 
 SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA — PEDIATRIC 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
Tachycardia is related to acute injury or volume loss?. 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
IV Normal Saline (KVO). If hypovolemic component is suspected, administer 20 mL/kg IV Bolus of 
Normal Saline. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Synchronized cardioversion 0.5 joules/kg for symptomatic patients. Subsequent cardioversion may be 
done at up to 1 joule/kg. If cardioversion is warranted, consider administration of Sedation for Electrical 
Therapy , per protocol. 
Adenosine 0.1 mg/kg rapid IV/. If no effect, repeat Adenosine 0.2 mg/kg Rapid IV push. MAXIMUM 
single dose of Adenosine must not exceed 12 mg. 
Consider Vagal maneuvers. 
Synchronized cardioversion should be considered for only those children whose heart rate is in excess of 220, 
and who demonstrate one or more of the following signs of hypoperfusion: Decreased level of consciousness, 
weak and thready pulses, capillary refill time of more than 4 seconds, or no palpable BLOOD PRESSURE. 
REMINDER : Vagal maneuvers may precipitate asystole and therefore should be employed with caution in 
the field and only in a cardiac -monitored child wit h IV access. 
 VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA WITH PULSES —ADULT & PEDIATRIC 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
If Systolic BLOOD PRESSURE is unstable (less than 100mm Hg ): synchronized cardioversion a t 100 J, 
200 J, 300 J and 360 J or the equivalent biphasic values as per manufacturer. Check rhythm and pulse 
between each attempted cardioversion. 
In Pediatric patients, synchronized cardioversion per Pediatric Color -Coded Appendix. 
If cardioversion is warranted, see Sedation for Electrical Therapy 
If systolic BLOOD PRESSURE is stable (greater than or equal to 100mm Hg) administer Amiodarone 
150 mg in 10 cc Normal Saline, slow IV over 8 -10 minutes. 
In Pediatric patients, Amiodarone dose per Pediatric Col or-Coded Appendix. 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications or attempts at cardioversion 
Magnesium Sulfate (for Torsades de Pointes or suspected hypomagnesemic state or severe refractory 
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA) 1 – 2 grams IV over 5 minutes. 
CONTRAINDICATIONS: Heart Block, renal disease. 
Amiodarone infusion 1 mg/min IV. 
For example: 100mg/100ml – 1mg/minute 
Lidocaine 1 – 1.5 mg/kg IV; subsequent dosage: 0.5 – 0.75 mg/kg IV every 3 – 5 minutes to a total dose 
of 3 mg/kg. If dysrh ythmia is successfully converted after administration of Lidocaine bolus, consider IV 
infusion of Lidocaine 2 – 4 mg/min. 
Adenosine 6 mg or 12 mg IV push; in selected cases ONLY. 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
 NO NO YES NO 
 Carefully monitor patients as you treat them; stable tachycardia may convert to unstable 
rhythms/conditions quickly. 
 Sedate patients prior to cardioversion, if time allows. 
Tachycardia / Stable (Normal Mental Status, Palpable 
Radial Pulse) 
APPLY CARDIAC MONITOR P 
 Vascular Access 
12-Lead ECG P Narrow Complex 
≤0.11 Sec Wide Complex 
 Vagal Maneuvers 
Successful ? 
Admini ster 
ADENOSINE 6 mg rapid IVP P 
Successful ? 
Administer 
ADENOSINE 12 mg rapid IVP P Undifferentiated 
Monomorphic VT 
Suspected to be SVT 
with Aberrancy Regular 
Monomorphic VT Tors ades de 
AMIODARONE 
150 mg in 50 cc NS 
over 10 min P MAGNESIUM SULFAT 
2.0 gm IV in 50 cc NS 
over 10 min P 
Successful ? Successful ? 
Sychronized 
Cardioversion 
Consider sedation: 
ETOMIDA TE 
0.15 mg/kg IV Defibrillation 
Consider sedation: 
0.15 mg/kg IV P P 
Continue General Patient Care 
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO HOSPITAL 
 GENERAL ADULT ASSESSMENT 
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO HOSPITAL 
 NO NO 
 NO NO 
 NO NO NO 
Tachycardia / Unstable (Mental Status Changes, No 
Palpable Radial Pulse) 
APPLY CARDIAC MONITOR P 
 Vascular Access 
Narrow Complex 
≤0.11 Sec Wide Complex 
If IV established, 
administer 
Adenosine 12 mg 
rapid IVP P 
Rhythm change? 
Sychronized 
Cardioversion 
Consider sedation: 
0.15 mg/kg IV P 
Rhythm change? 
Repeat Sychronized 
Cardioversion; 
assess need for 
repeat sedation P 
Rhythm change? Monomorphic VT Torsades de 
Defibrillation 
Consider sedation: 
0.15 mg/kg IV P 
Rhythm change? 
MAGNE SIUM SULFAT 
2.0 gm IV in 50 cc NS 
over 10 min P 
Rhythm change? 
defibrillation; 
Assess need for 
repeat sedation P 
Rhythm change? Sychronized 
Cardioversion 
Consider sedation: 
0.15 mg/kg IV P 
Rhythm change? 
AMIODARONE 
150 mg in 50 cc NS 
over 10 min P 
Rhythm change? 
Repeat Sychronized 
Cardioversion or 
defibrillate if VT not 
resolved; assess need 
for repeat sedation P 
Rhythm change? 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO HOSPITAL 
 NO NO 
 Recommended exam: Mental Status, Skin, Heart, Lungs, Abdomen, Back, Extremities, Neuro. 
 Carefully monitor patients as you treat them; stable tachycardias may convert to unstable 
rhythms/conditions quickly. 
 Sedate patients prior to cardioversion, if time allows. 
 The most common tachyarrythmia in children is sinus. 
Pediatr ic Tachycardia / Stable (Normal Mental Status, 
Palpable Radial Pulse) 
General Pediatric Assessment 
Cardiac monitor P
Vascular Access A
12-Lead ECG P
 Narrow Complex 
≤0.11 Sec Wide Complex 
Vagal Maneuvers P
Successful? 
0.1 mg/kg rapid IV push 
not to exceed 6 mg P
Successful? 
0.2 mg/kg rapid IV push 
not to exceed 12 mg P
 Undifferentiate 
Monomorphic VT 
Suspected to be SVT 
with Aberrancy Regular 
Monomorphic VT Torsades de 
AMIODARONE 
5 mg/kg in 50 cc NS 
over 20 mi n MAGNESIUM SULFATE 
25 mg/kg IV in 50 cc 
NS over 10 m in 
Successful? 
Sychronized Cardioversion 
start at 0.5 to 1 J/kg; may use 
2 J/kg if unsuccessful 
Consider sedation 
ETOMIDATE 0.15 mg/kg IV 
 THE PATIENT SHOULD BE IMMEDIATELY REFERRE D TO HOSPITAL 
Pediatric Tachycardia / Unstable (Mental S tatus Changes, 
No Palpable Radial Pulse) 
General Pediatric Assessment 
Cardiac monitor P
Vascular Access A
 Narrow Complex 
≤0.11 Sec Wide Complex 
If IV established, 
administer ADENOSINE 
0.2 mg/kg rapid IV push 
not to exceed 12 mg P
Rhythm change? 
Sychronized Cardioversion 
start at 0.5 to 1 J/kg; may 
use 2 J/kg if unsuccessful; 
Consider sedation 
ETOMIDATE 0.15 mg/kg IV P
 Torsades de Pointes Monomorphic VT 
Defibrillate at 2 J/kg 
increasing to 4 J/kg; 
Consider sedation 
ETOMIDATE 0 .15 mg/kg IV 
Rhythm chang e? 
MAGNESIUM SULFATE 
25 mg/kg IV in 50 cc NS 
over 10 min P
 Sychronized Cardioversion 
Start at 0.5 to 1 J/kg; may 
use 2 J/kg If unsuccessful; 
or defibrillate at 2 J/kg 
increasing to 4 J/kg; 
Consider sedation 
ETOMIDATE 0.15 mg/kg IV P
Rhythm change? 
AMIODARONE 
5.0 mg/kg in 50 cc NS over 
Rhythm change? 
Repeat Sychronized 
Cardioversion or defibrillate 
if VT not resolved; assess 
need for repeat sedation; 
repeat AMIODARONE P
HYPERTENSION 
Adult having blood 
pressure measured 
Measuring blood 
pressure Hypertension in 
Diagnosis Hypertension not 
Hypertension 
cardiovascular risk and 
target organ damage 
Management of 
hypertension 
 MEASURING BLOOD PRESSURE 
Because automated devices may not measure blood pressure accurately if there is pulse 
irregularity (for example, due to atrial fibrillat ion), palpate the radial or brachial pulse before 
measuring blood pressure. If pulse irregularity is present, measure blood pressure manually using 
direct auscultation over the brachial artery. When measuring blood pressure in the clinic, 
standardise the e nvironment and provide a relaxed, temperate setting, with the person quiet and 
seated, and their arm outstretched and supported. Appropriate cuff size for the person's arm is 
Postural hypotension 
In people with symptoms of postural hypotension (fal ls or postural dizziness): measure blood 
pressure with the person either supine or seated measure blood pressure again with the person 
standing for at least 1 minute prior to measurement. 
If the systolic blood pressure falls by 20 mmHg or more when the per son is standing: 
 review medication 
 measure subsequent blood pressures with the person standing 
 consider referral to specialist care if symptoms of postural hypotension persist. 
Measuring the clinic blood pressure 
When considering a diagnosis of hypertens ion, measure blood pressure in both arms. If the 
difference in readings between arms is more than 20 mmHg, repeat the measurements. 
If the difference in readings between arms remains more than 20 mmHg on the second 
measurement, measure subsequent blood pre ssures in the arm with the higher reading. 
If blood pressure measured in the clinic is 140/90 mmHg or higher: 
Take a second measurement during the consultation. 
If the second measurement is substantially different from the first, take a third measurement. 
Record the lower of the last two measurements as the clinic blood pressure. 
Definitions and classification of office blood pressure levels (mmHg) 
The blood pressure (BP) category is defined by the highest level of BP, whether systolic or diasto lic. 
Isolated systolic hypertension should be graded 1, 2, or 3 according to systolic BP values in the 
ranges indicated. 
Stratification of total CV risk 
The initial evaluation of a patient with hypertension should 
(i) confirm the diagnosis of hype rtension, 
(ii) detect causes of secondary hypertension, and 
(iii) assess CV risk, OD and concomitant clinical conditions. 
This calls for BP measurement, medical history including family history, physical examination. 
 Office blood pressure measurement 
Orthostatic hypotension —defined as a reduction in SBP of ≥20 mmHg or in DBP of ≥10 mmHg within 3 
min of standing 
Offer antihypertensive drug treatment to people aged under 80 years with stage 1 hypertension clinic 
blood pressure 140/90 mmHg or higher and subsequent ambulatory blood pressure monitoring daytime 
average or home blood pressure monitoring average blood pressure 135/85 mmHg or high er who have 
one or more of the following: 
 target organ damage 
 established cardiovascular disease 
 renal disease 
 diabetes 
 10-year cardiovascular risk equivalent to 20% or greater. 
Offer antihypertensive drug treatment to people of any age with stage 2 hypertension clinic blood 
pressure 160/100 mmHg or higher and subsequent ambulatory blood pressure monitoring daytime 
average or home blood pressure monitoring a verage blood pressure 150/95 mmHg or higher . 
A 12 -lead ECG should be part of the routine assessment of all hypertensive patients. Its sensitivity in 
detecting LVH is low but, nonetheless, LVH detected by the Sokolow -Lyon index (SV1 + RV5 >3.5 mV), 
the mod ified Sokolow -Lyon index (largest S -wave + largest R -wave >3.5 mV), RaVL >1.1 mV 
CRITERIA FOR STARTING ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUG 
Where possible, recommend treatment with drugs taken only once a day. 
Offer people with isolated systolic hypertension (systolic blood pressure 160 mmHg or more) the same 
treatment as people with both raised systolic and diastolic blood pressure. 
Antihypertensive treatment in the elderly (including one in hypertensive patie nts aged 80 years or 
more) is recommended when SBP is ≥ 160mmHg. 
Do not combine an ACE inhibitor with an ARB to treat hypertension. 
CHOOSING ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUG TREATMENT 
Person aged under 55 
with hypertension Person aged over 55 or 
black person of African 
or Caribbean family 
origin of any age with 
hypertension 
ACE inhibitor or ARB 
Beta -blockers are not a preferred 
initial therapy for hypertension. 
However, beta -blockers may be 
considered in younger people, 
particularly: 
 those with an intolerance or 
contraindication to ACE 
inhibitors and angiotensin II 
receptor antagonists or 
 women o f child -bearing 
potential or 
 people with evidence of 
increased sympathetic drive . Step 1 
CCB (calcium channel blocker) 
If a CCB is not suitable, for example 
because of oedema or into lerance, 
or if there is evidence of heart 
failure or a high risk of heart failure, 
offer a thiazide -like diuretic. 
If diuretic treatment is to be 
initiated or changed, offer a 
thiazide like diuretic, such as 
chlortalidone (12.5 –25.0 mg once 
daily) or indap amide (1.5 mg 
modified -release once daily or 2.5 
mg once daily) in preference to a 
conventional thiazide diuretic such 
as bendroflumethiazide 
or hydrochlorothiazide. 
If blood pressure is not controlled by step 1 
treatment, offer step 2 treatment with a CCB in 
combination with either an ACE inhibitor or an ARB 
If a CCB is not suit able for step 2 treatment, for example 
because of oedema or intolerance, or if there is evidence 
of heart failure or a high risk of heart failure, offer a 
thiazide -like diuretic, such as chlortalidone (12.5 –25.0 mg 
once daily) or indapamide (1.5 mg modifie d-release once 
daily or 2.5 mg once daily). 
For black people of African or Caribbean family 
origin, consider an ARB in preference to an ACE 
inhibitor, in combination with a CCB. 
If therapy is initiated with a beta -blocker and a 
second drug is required, add a CCB rather than a 
thiazide -like diuretic to reduce the person's risk of 
developing diabetes. 
If treatment with three drugs is required, the 
combination of ACE inhibitor or ARB, CCB and 
thiazide -like diuretic such as chlortalidone (12.5 –
25.0 mg o nce daily) or indapamide (1.5 mg modified -
release once daily or 2.5 mg once daily) should be 
Regard clinic blood pressure that remains higher than 
140/90 mmHg after treatment with the optimal or 
best tolerated doses of an ACE inhibitor or an ARB 
plus a CCB plus a diuretic as resistant hypertension, 
and consider adding a fourth antihypertensive drug 
and/or seeking expert advice. 
Resistant hypertension 
Consider further diuretic therapy with low -dose 
spironolactone (25 mg once daily) if the blood 
potassium level is normal . Use particular caution in 
people with a reduced eGFR because they have an 
increased risk of hyperkalaemia. 
If further diuretic therapy for resistant hypertension 
at step 4 is not tolerated, or is contraindicated or 
ineffective, consider an alpha - or beta -blocker. 
If blood pressure remains uncontrolled with the 
optimal or maximum tolerated doses of four drugs, 
seek expert advice if it has not yet been obtained. 
While there is consensus that drug treatment of severe hypertension in pregnancy (>160 for SBP o r 
>110 mmHg for DBP) is required and beneficial. 
Consider early initiation of antihypertensive treatment at values ≥140/90 mmHg in women with 
(i) gestational hypertension (with or without proteinuria), 
(ii) pre-existing hypertension with the superimposition of gestational hypertension or 
(iii) hypertension with asym ptomatic OD or symptoms at any time during pregnancy. 
The recommendations to use methyldopa, labetalol and nifedipine as the only calcium antagonist really 
tested in pregnancy can be confirmed. Beta -blockers (possibly causing fetal growth retardation if gi ven 
in early pregnancy) and diuretics (in pre -existing reduction of plasma volume) should be used with 
Symptoms of pre -eclampsia 
Tell women to seek advice from a healthcare professional immediately if they experience any of: 
 severe headache 
 proble ms with vision such as blurring or flashing before the eyes 
 severe pain just below the ribs 
 vomiting 
 sudden swelling of the face, hands or feet. 
Mild hypertension (blood pressure 140/90 –149/99 mmHg) 
Do not treat mild hypertension. 
Measure blood pressure a t least 4 times a day. 
Test kidney function, electrolytes, transaminases and bilirubin 2 times a week. 
Moderate hypertension (blood pressure 150/100 –159/109 mmHg) 
Treat moderate hypertension with first -line oral labetalol to keep blood pressure below 150/ 80–100 
mmHg. Offer treatment other than labetalol only after considering side -effect profiles for the woman, 
fetus and newborn baby. Alternatives include methyldopa and nifedipine. 
Severe hypertension (blood pressure 160/110 mmHg or higher) 
Admit women wi th severe hypertension to hospital until blood pressure is 159/109 mmHg or lower. 
Treat with first -line oral labetalol to keep blood pressure below 150/80 –100 mmHg. Offer treatment 
other than labetalol only after considering side -effect profiles for the wo man, fetus and newborn baby. 
Alternatives include methyldopa and nifedipine. 
HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS IN PREGNANCY 
Hypertensive emergencies are defined as large elevations in SBP or DBP (>180 mmHg or >120 mmHg, 
respectively) associated with impending or progressive OD (organ damage), s uch as major 
neurological changes, hypertensive encephalopathy, cerebral infarction, intracranial haemorrhage, 
acute LV failure, acute pulmonary oedema, aortic dissection, renal failure, or eclampsia. 
Isolated large BP elevations without acute OD (hyperte nsive urgencies) —often associated with 
treatment discontinuation or reduction as well as with anxiety —should not be considered an emergency 
but treated by reinstitution or intensification of drug therapy and treatment of anxiety. 
Current treatment is found ed on agents that can be administered by intravenous infusion and titrated, 
and so can act promptly but gradually in order to avoid excessive hypotension and further ischaemic OD. 
Labetalol, sodium nitroprusside, nicardipine, nitrates and furosemide are am ong the intravenous agents 
most usually employed but in these severely ill patients, tre atment should be individualized 
HYPERTENSIVE EMERGENCIES 
 CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE (PULMONARY EDEMA) 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine Patient Care 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Nitroglycerin 0.4-0.8mg (1/150 gr.) ta blet/spray, sublingual 
SBP must be >120 mm Hg 
May be repeated every 5 minutes, as dictated by BP. 
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) assistance, if not contraindicated, and if nebulizer 
therapy can be continued with the CPAP device. 
MEDICAL CONT ROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Furosemide 20-40mg IV, or 40 -80mg IV if patient is already on diuretics. 
Norepinephrine infusion: 0.1mcg/kg/min IV via pump, titrate to goal Systolic Blood Pressure 
of 90mmHg, OR 
Dopamine 2-20 mcg/kg/min IV 
Red Flag – CAUTION : 
Avoid nitroglycerin in ALL patients who have used a phosphodiesterase inhibitor such as: 
sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio), vardenafil (Levitra, Staxyn), tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca) which are used 
for erectile dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension within the last 48 HOURS . Also avoid use in 
patients receiving intravenous epoprostenol (Flolan) which is also used for pulmonary 
hypertension. 
 POST RESUSCITATIVE CARE/ROSC — ADULT 
EMT/EMT -INTERMEDIATE/ADVANCED EMT STANDING ORDERS 
Routine P atient Care 
PARAMEDIC STANDING ORDERS 
Consider treatable causes such as overdose, cardiogenic shock and STEMI. 
Manage dysrhythmias according to specific protocols. 
Perform a 12 -lead ECG; If STEMI is present and the patient is stable enough follow the 
Dep artment – approved STEMI POE plan. Consult with medical control if questions arise. 
Begin induced therapeutic hypothermia, but do not delay transport 
Norepinephrine infusion: 0.1mcg/kg/min IV via pump, titrate to goal Systolic Blood Pressure 
of 90mmHg, OR 
Dopamine 2-20mcg/kg/min IV 
MEDICAL CONTROL MAY ORDER 
Additional doses of above medications 
Epinephrine Infusion - Administer 1 mcg to 10 mcg per minute IV. 
For example, mix 1 mg of 1:1000 Epinephrine in 250 ml Normal Saline, then 15 micro 
drops/minute = 1 mcg / min 
Amiodarone bolus as ordered followed by 1 mg/min IV drip. 
For example: 100mg/100ml - 1mg/minute. 
Lidocaine 1-1.5 mg/kg IV followed by drip at 2 -4 mg/min. 
REMINDER : This is an extremely unstable period. The patient should be monit ored closely and 
frequently. Recurrent dysrhythmias, hypotension and re -arrest are not uncommon occurrences. 
Avoid hyperthermia and hyperventilation. 
Avoid hyperoxygenation; oxygen administration should be titrated to patient condition, and 
withheld unless evidence of hypoxemia, dyspnea, or an SpO2 <94%, especially in the presence of a 
suspected CVA/TIA or ACS. 
RESPIRATORY DISEASES 
RHINITIS (COMMON COLD) 
Rhinitis, which occurs most commonly as allergic rhi nitis, is an inflammation of the nasal membranes 
that is characterized by sneezing, nasal congestion, nasal itching, and rhinorrhea, in any combination . 
Although allergic rhinitis itself is not life -threatening (unless accompanied by severe asthma or 
anaph ylaxis), morbidity from the condition can be significant. 
Signs and Symptoms 
 Sneezing 
 Itching: Nose, eyes, ears, palate 
 Rhinorrhea 
 Postnasal drip 
 Congestion 
 Headache 
 Red eyes 
 Eye swelling 
 Drowsiness 
Complications o f this allergic rhinitis include the following: 
 Acute or chronic sinusitis 
 Otitis media 
 Sleep disturbance or apnea 
 Dental problems (overbite): Caused by excessive breathing through the mouth 
 Palatal abnormalities 
 Eustachian tube dysfunction 
Manifestations of allergic rhinitis affecting the ears, eyes, and oropharynx include the following: 
 Ears: Retraction and abnormal flexibility of the tympanic membrane 
 Eyes: Injection and swelling of the palpebral conjunctivae, with excess tear production; Dennie -
Morgan lines (prominent creases below the inferior eyelid); and dark circles around the eyes 
(“allergic shiners”), which are related to vasodilation or nasal congestion 
 Oropharynx: "Cobblestoning," that is, streaks of lymphoid tissue on the posterior pharynx; 
tonsillar hypertrophy; and malocclusion (overbite) and a high -arched palate 
Management 
The management of allergic rhinitis consists of the following 3 major treatment strategies: 
 Environmental control measures and allergen avoidance: These include keepi ng exposure to 
allergens such as pollen, dust mites, and mold to a minimum 
 Pharmacologic management: Patients are often successfully treated with oral antihistamines, 
decongestants, or both; regular use of an intranasal steroid spray may be more appropria te for 
patients with chronic symptoms 
Key recommendations include the following: 
 For patients with a stuffy nose, nasal passage discoloration, and/or red and watery eyes, 
doctors should forgo sinus imaging process in favor of specific immunoglobulin E 
screening. Sinonasal imaging exposes patients to unnecessary radiation. 
 Intranasal steroids and oral antihistamines are recommended as first lines of treatment. 
Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists are not. 
 Sublingual or subcutaneous immunotherapy should be offered to patients who do not 
respond to pharmacologic therapy. 
Most cases of allergic rhinitis respond to pharmacotherapy. Patients with intermittent symptoms are 
often treated adequately with oral antihistamines, decongestants, or both as n eeded. 
Cetirizine (Zi rtec) 
Competes with histamine for H1 receptors in GI tract, blood vessels, and respiratory tract, reducing 
hypersensitivity reactions. Once -daily dosing is convenient. Bedtime dosing may be useful if sedation is a 
Aller gies/Hay Fever/Urticaria 
Perennial and seasonal allergic and vasomotor rhinitis; relief of symptoms from colds, urticaria, 
angioedema, anaphylactic reactions, pruritus, allergic conjunctivitis 5-10 mg PO qDay, depending on 
severity of symptoms; not to exc eed 10 mg qDay 
Renal impairment 
 GFR >50 mL/min: Dose adjustment not necessary 
 GFR ≤ 50 mL/min: 5 mg PO qDay 
Allergies/Hay Fever/Urticaria 
Perennial and seasonal allergic and vasomotor rhinitis 
<2 years: Safety and efficacy not established 
 2-6 years: 2.5 mg (0.5 teaspoon) oral solution PO qDay; can increase to 5 mg PO qDay or 2.5 mg PO 
twice daily; not to exceed 5 mg qDay 
>6 years: 5 -10 mg PO qDay, depending on severity of symptoms; not to exceed 10 mg qDay 
Levocetirizine (Xo zal) 
Histamine1 -recep tor antagonist. Active enantiomer of cetirizine. Peak plasma levels reached within 1 h 
and half -life is about 8 h. Available as a 5 -mg breakable (scored) tab. Indicated for seasonal and 
perennial allergic rhinitis. 
Renal Impairment 
CrCl 50 -80 mL/min: 2.5 mg PO qDay 
CrCl 30 -50 mL/min: 2.5 mg PO qOD 
CrCl 10 -30 mL/min: 2.5 mg PO 2x/wk 
CrCl <10 mL/min: contraindicated 
Allergic Rhinitis 
<6 months: Safety and efficacy not established 
6 months to 5 years: 1.25 mg PO qDay (evening) 
6-12 years: 2.5 mg PO qDay (eve ning) 
>12 years: 5 mg PO qDay (evening) 
Montelukast (Singulair) 
Selective leukotriene receptor antagonist that inhibits the cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT 1) receptor. 
Selectively prevents action of leukotrienes released by mast cells and eosinophils. When used as a single 
agent, has been shown to result in a reduction of seasonal allergic rhinitis symptoms . 
Prophylaxis and maintenance treatment 
10 mg (single 10 -mg tablet) PO once daily in evening 
Exercise -Induced Bronchospasm 
Prophylaxis 
10 mg PO 2 hours before exercise; do not take additional dose within 24 hours 
If taking drug for another indication, do not take additional dose to prevent exercise -induced 
bronchospasm (EIB) 
Allergic or Perennial Rhinitis 
10 mg (single 10 -mg tablet) PO once da ily 
Administration 
Patients aged ≥12 years with both asthma and allergic rhinitis: 1 dose PO at bedtime 
Patients with allergic rhinitis: Dosing time may be individualized to patient needs 
Granules may be taken directly; mixed in applesauce, carrots, rice, or ice cream; or di ssolved in 5 mL of 
breast milk or baby formula (administer within 15 minutes of opening) 
Prophylaxis and maintenance treatment in patients aged ≥12 months 
<12 months: Safety and efficacy not established 
12-24 months: 4 mg (granules) PO once daily in evening 
2-6 years: 4 mg (chewable tablet or granules) PO once daily in evening 
6-15 years: 5 mg (chewable tablet) PO once daily in evening 
>15 years: 10 mg (conventional tablet) PO once daily in evening 
Exercise -Induced Bronchospasm 
Proph ylaxis 
6-15 years: 5 mg (chewable tablet) PO 2 hours before exercise; do not take additional dose within 24 
>15 years: 10 mg PO 2 hours before exercise; do not take additional dose within 24 hours 
If taking drug for another indication, do not take ad ditional dose to prevent EIB 
Perennial Allergic Rhinitis 
<6 months: Safety and efficacy not established 
6-24 months: 4 mg (granules) PO once daily 
2-6 years: 4 mg (chewable tablet or granules) PO once daily 
6-15 years: 5 mg (chewable tablet) PO once daily 
>15 years: 10 mg (conventional tablet) PO once daily 
Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis 
<2 years: Safety and efficacy not established 
2-6 years: 5 mg (chewable tablet) or 4 mg (granules) PO once daily 
6-15 years: 5 mg (chewable tablet) PO once daily 
>15 years: 1 0 mg (conventional tablet) PO once daily 
 UPPER RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTION 
URI represents the most common acute illness evaluated in the outpatient setting. URIs range from the 
common cold —typically a mild, self -limited, catarrhal syndrom e of the nasopharynx —to life -threatening 
illnesses such as epiglottitis 
Signs and symptoms 
Details of the patient's history aid in differentiating a common cold from conditions that require 
targeted therapy, such as group A streptococcal pharyngitis, bacte rial sinusitis, and lower respiratory 
tract infections. Clinical manifestations of these conditions, as well as allergy, show significant overlap. 
Common URI terms are defined as follows: 
 Rhinitis: Inflammation of the nasal mucosa 
 Rhinosinusitis or sinusi tis: Inflammation of the nares and paranasal sinuses, including frontal, 
ethmoid, maxillary, and sphenoid 
 Nasopharyngitis (rhinopharyngitis or the common cold): Inflammation of the nares, pharynx, 
hypopharynx, uvula, and tonsils 
 Pharyngitis: Inflammation of the pharynx, hypopharynx, uvula, and tonsils 
 Epiglottitis (supraglottitis): Inflammation of the superior portion of the larynx and supraglottic 
 Laryngitis: Inflammation of the larynx 
 Laryngotracheitis: Inflammation of the larynx, trachea, and s ubglottic area 
 Tracheitis: Inflammation of the trachea and subglottic area 
 Symptoms of Allergies, URIs, and Influenza 
Symptom Allergy URI Influenza 
Itchy, watery 
eyes Common Rare; conjunctivitis may 
occur with adenovirus Soreness behind eyes, sometimes 
conjunctivitis 
discharge Common Common Common 
congestion Common Common Sometimes 
Sneezing Very common Very common Sometimes 
Sore throat Sometimes (postnasal 
drip); itchy throat Very common Sometimes 
Cough Sometimes Common, mild to 
moderate, hacking cough Common, dry cough, can be severe 
Headache Sometimes, facial 
pain Rare Common 
Fever Never Rare in adults, possible in 
children Very common, 100 -102°F or higher (in 
young children), lasting 3 -4 days; may 
have chills 
Malais e Sometimes Sometimes Very common 
weakness Sometimes Sometimes Very common, can last for weeks, 
extreme exhaustion early in course 
Myalgias Never Slight Very common, often severe 
Duration Weeks 3-14 days 7 days, followed by additional days of 
cough and fatigue 
Viral nasopharyngitis 
Patients with the common cold may have a paucity of clinical findings despite notable subjective 
discomfort. Findings may include the following: 
 Nasal mucosal erythema and edema are common 
 Nasal discharge: Profuse discharge is more characteristic of viral infections than bacterial 
infections; initially clear secretions typically become cloudy white, yellow, or green over several 
days, even in viral infections 
  Foul breath 
 Fever: Less common in adults but may be pre sent in children with rhinoviral infections 
 Tonsillar hypertrophy 
 Cough: This is more suggestive of a viral, rather than a bacterial, etiology 
 Diarrhea: If associated with a URI, diarrhea suggests a viral etiology 
 Fever: Can be caused by EBV infections and influenza 
Bacterial pharyngitis 
This may be difficult to distinguish from viral pharyngitis. Assessment for group A streptococcal 
infection warrants special attention. The following physical findings suggest a high risk for 
group A streptococcal dise ase 
Group A streptococcal pharyngitis The following physical findings suggest a high risk for group A 
streptococcal disease: 
 Erythema, swelling, or exudates of the tonsils or pharynx 
 Temperature of 38.3°C or higher 
 Tender anterior cervical nodes (≥1 cm) 
 Absence of conjunctivitis, cough, and rhinorrhea, which are symptoms that may suggest viral 
Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis In children , acute bacterial sinusitis is defined as a URI with any of the 
following : 
 Persistent nasal discharge (any type) or cough lasting 10 days or more without improvement 
 Worsening course (new or worse nasal discharge, cough, fever) after initial improvement 
 Severe onset (fever of 102° or greater with nasal discharge) for at least 3 consecutive days 
In older children and adults, symptoms (eg, pain, pressure) tend to localize to the affected sinus. 
Epiglottitis 
This condition is more often found in children aged 1 -5 years, who present with a sudden onset of the 
following symptoms: 
 Sore throat 
 Drooling, difficulty or pain during swallowing, globus sensation of a lump in the throat 
 Muffled dysphonia or loss of voice 
 Dry cough or no cough, dyspnea 
 Fever, fatigue or malaise (may be seen with any URI) 
 Tripod or sniffing posture 
 Laryngotracheitis and laryngotracheobronchitis 
 Nasopharyngitis often precedes laryngitis and tracheitis by several days 
 Swallowing may be difficult or painful 
 Patients may experience a globus sensation of a lump in the throat 
 Hoarseness or loss of voice i s a key manifestation of laryngeal involvement 
Features of whooping cough (pertussis) are as follows: 
 The classic whoop sound is an inspiratory gasping squeak that rises in pitch, typically 
interspersed between hacking coughs 
 The whoop is more common in children 
 Coughing often comes in paroxysms of a dozen coughs or more at a time and is often worst at 
The 3 classic phases of whooping cough are as follows: 
 Catarrhal (7 -10 days) with predominantly URI symptoms 
 Paroxysmal (1 -6 weeks) with episodic cough 
 Convalescent (7 -10 days) of gradual recovery 
Management 
Symptom -based therapy represents the mainstay of URI treatment in immunocompetent adults. 
Antimicrobial or antiviral therapy is appropriate in selected patients. 
Epiglottitis 
 Immediately admit the patient to the nearest hospital 
 Avoid instrumentation; insertion of tongue depressors or other instruments may provoke airway 
spasm and precipitate respiratory compromise 
 Monitor for respiratory fatigue, visually and with continuous pulse oximetry 
 Administer oxygen according to pulse oximetry results 
 Have equipment and personnel available for immediate intubation if necessary 
 Start intravenous (IV) antibiotics after collecting culture specimens 
 Empiric coverage for Haemophilus influenzae is appro priate; common choices include 
ceftriaxone or other third -generation cephalosporins, cefuroxime, and cefamandole 
 Correct volume deficits with IV fluids; avoid sedatives 
Laryngotracheitis 
 Hospitalization may be necessary, especially in infants and young c hildren who have hypoxemia, 
volume depletion, a risk of airway compromise, or respiratory fatigue 
 Mild cases of croup (ie, laryngotracheobronchitis) may be managed at home with moist air 
inhalation 
  Hospitalized patients require monitoring for respiratory fatigue, visually and with continuous 
pulse oximetry 
 Expertise for immediate intubation and access to the necessary equipment are required if 
respiratory failure is a possibility 
 Administer humidified oxygen to all hypoxemic patients. In patients who do not require oxygen 
therapy, a cool -mist humidifier may be used 
 IV or oral glucocorticoids are commonly used to reduce symptoms and shorten hospitalization in 
patients with moderate to severe croup 
 Inhaled racemic epinephrine may temporarily dilate the a irways 
Rhinosinusitis 
 Most cases of acute rhinosinusitis, including mild and moderate bacterial sinusitis, resolve 
without antibiotics 
 Consider antibiotic treatment if symptoms persist without improving for 10 or more days, or if 
symptoms are severe or w orsening during a period of 3 -4 days or longer 
 Give first -line antibiotics for 5 -7 days in most adults; for 10 -14 days in children 
 Begin treatment with an agent that most narrowly covers likely pathogens, including 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, nontypeable H influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis 
 Initial first -line options include amoxicillin/clavulanate 
 Alternatives in penicillin -allergic patients are doxycycline and respiratory fluoroquinolones (eg, 
levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) 
 In patients who worsen or do not improve after 3 -5 days of empirical therapy, consider resistant 
pathogens, structural abnormality, or noninfectious etiology 
 Adjunctive therapy for adults includes nasal saline irrigation and intranasal steroids 
Group A streptococcal disease 
 Oral pe nicillin or amoxicillin for 10 days for patients without an allergy to penicillin 
 If compliance is a concern, consider a single IM injection of benzathine penicillin G 
 A first -generation cephalosporin may be used in patients with non -anaphylactic penicil lin allergy 
 Options for penicillin -allergic patients include clindamycin or clarithromycin for 10 days or 
azithromycin for 5 days 
Most URIs are self -diagnosed and self -treated at home. Patients who present with URIs often benefit 
from reassuran ce, education, and instructions for symptomatic home treatment. Symptom -based 
therapy represents the mainstay of URI treatment in immunocompetent adults, although antimicrobial 
or antiviral therapy is appropriate in selected patients . 
3 basic principles fo r the effective use of antibiotics to treat pediatric URIs, including acute otitis media, 
acute bacterial sinusitis, and streptococcal pharyngitis.The principles are as follows: 
 Accurate diagnosis of a bacterial infection; 
  Consideration of the risks vs be nefits of antibiotic treatment; and 
 Implementation of judicious prescribing strategies, including selection of the most effective 
antibiotic, prescription of an appropriate dose, and treating for the shortest possible duration. 
These principles will help healthcare providers distinguish bacterial infections from viral infections. 
Symptomatic, Nonpharmacologic Self -Care 
The following home -care measures may help to provide relief of nasal and sinus symptoms: 
 Warm, moist air 
 Nasal saline 
 Hydration 
 Warm fa cial packs 
 Bulb suction (for infants) 
 Avoidance of nasal irritants (eg, cigarette smoke, indoor and outdoor air pollutants) 
Nasal and paranasal sinus mucosae may become more irritated with dry air. The following strategies 
may maintain the moisture of m embranes and loosen nasal secretions: 
 Turn on hot shower water, close the bathroom door, sit down, and inhale the steam 
 Take long, hot showers 
 Use a vaporizer to increase humidity in rooms 
If a vaporizer is used, the water must be changed daily to preve nt microbial growth, especially with 
heated vaporizers. Heated systems may pose a risk for scalding injuries. 
Nasal saline may provide temporary relief of congestion by removing nasal crusts and dried secretions. A 
systematic review of nasal saline irrigat ion as an adjunct in chronic rhinosinusitis symptom management 
concluded that the evidence shows symptom relief and that irrigation is well tolerated by most 
patients.Patients with sinusitis experienced symptomatic benefit from use of a neti pot method of nasal 
irrigation. 
Symptomatic, Pharmacologic Therapy 
Treatment of an uncomplicated URI is focused on specific measures to reduce symptoms, including use 
of the following: 
 Oral or topical decongestants 
 Antihistamines . Histamines are not thought to play a r ole in generating URI symptoms; 
therefore, newer, nonsedating antihistamines are not useful in reducing URI symptoms. 
However, first -generation oral antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, 
clemastine) have some anticholinergic effects, which , in theory, could reduce sneezing and 
rhinorrhea. 
 Saline nasal drops 
 Guaifenesin 
 Cromolyn 
 Cough associated with the common cold may be treated with a first -generation antihistamine combined 
with a decongestant (eg, brompheniramine with pseudoephedrine) . 
Increased fluids are warranted to replace insensible losses and reduced oral intake. However, alcohol 
may cause swelling of the nasal and paranasal sinus mucosae. 
Antibiotics alter the gastrointestinal flora, and some foods may not be as digestible for days or weeks 
after antibiotics are used. Consumption of yogurt containing active cultures has been advocated as an 
aid to restoring normal flora after antibiotic therapy. 
Oral and topical decongestants 
Oral decongestants may provide symptom relief for patients with persistent rhinorrhea or sneezing 
associated with URI. However, despite common usage, evidence regarding the effectiveness of oral 
decongestants in acute sinusitis is scarce. 
Adverse effects of oral decongestants include the following: 
 Anxio usness 
 Insomnia 
 Tachycardia and dysrhythmias 
 Elevated blood pressure 
 Palpitations 
 Urinary retention 
The risk -to-benefit ratio for using cough and cold medicines in children younger than 2 years requires 
careful consideration because serious a dverse events, including fatalities, have been reported with the 
use of over -the-counter preparations.Numerous over -the-counter cough and cold preparations are 
labeled "do not use" in children younger than 4 years. 
Antibiotics used in group A streptococcal infection are as follows: 
 Amoxicillin (Amoxil ) 
 Erythromycin 
 Amoxicil lin and clavulanate (Augmentin ) 
 Cefaclor (Ceclor) 
 Azithromycin (Zithromax) 
Antibiotics used in epiglottitis are as follows: 
 Cefuroxime 
 Ceftriaxone 
 Cefotaxime 
Antibiotics used in pe rtussis are as follows: 
 Clarithromycin 
 Erythromycin 
 Azithromycin 
Antibiotics used in acute bacterial rhinosinusitis are as follows: 
 Amoxicillin/clavulanate 
 Doxycycline 
 ACUTE SINUSITIS (Rhinosinusitis ) 
Sinusitis is characterized by inflammation of th e lining of the paranasal sinuses. 
Diagnosis and management of acute bacterial sinusitis in children and adolescents 
 Previous diagnostic criteria for acute bacterial sinusitis in children were acute URI with either 
nasal discharge and/or daytime cough for longer than 10 days or severe onset of fever, purulent 
nasal discharge, and other respiratory symptoms for 3 or more consecutive days. A third 
criterion added to the updated guideline is URI with worsening symptoms such as nasal 
discharge, cough, and fever after initial improvement. 
 Physicians may now observe children with persistent infection lasting longer than 10 days for an 
additional 3 days before prescribing antibiotics, but antibiotics should still be given to children 
with severe onset or worsening symptoms. 
 First -line therapy is amoxicillin with or without clavulanate. 
 Imaging tests are not recommended for children with uncomplicated acute bacterial sinusitis, 
although children with suspected orbital or CNS complications should undergo CT scannin g of 
the paranasal sinuses. 
Signs and symptoms 
Clinical findings in acute sinusitis may include the following: 
 Pain over cheek and radiating to frontal region or teeth, increasing with straining or bending 
 Redness of nose, cheeks, or eyelids 
 Tender ness to pressure over the floor of the frontal sinus immediately above the inner canthus 
 Referred pain to the vertex, temple, or occiput 
 Postnasal discharge 
 A blocked nose 
 Persistent coughing or pharyngeal irritation 
 Facial pain 
 Hyposmia 
Symptoms o f acute bacterial rhinosinusitis include the following: 
 Facial pain or pressure (especially unilateral) 
 Hyposmia/anosmia 
 Nasal congestion 
 Nasal drainage 
 Postnasal drip 
 Maxillary dental pain 
 Ear fullness/pressure 
The diagnosis of acute bacterial sinusitis should be entertained under either of the following 
circumstances: 
 Presence of symptoms or signs of acute rhinosinusitis 10 days or more beyond the onset of 
upper respiratory symptoms 
  Worsening of symptoms or signs of acute r hinosinusitis within 10 days after an initial 
improvement 
The following signs may be noted on physical examination: 
 Purulent nasal secretions 
 Purulent posterior pharyngeal secretions 
 Mucosal erythema 
 Periorbital edema 
 Tenderness overlying sinuses 
 Air-fluid levels on transillumination of the sinuses (60% reproducibility rate for assessing 
maxillary sinus disease) 
 Facial erythema 
Acute sinusitis is a clinical diagnosis. 
Management 
Treatment of acute sinusitis consists of providing adequat e drainage of the involved sinus and 
appropriate systemic treatment of the likely bacterial pathogens. Drainage can be achieved surgically 
with sinus puncture and irrigation techniques. Options for medical drainage are as follows: 
 Oral alpha -adrenergic va soconstrictors (eg, pseudoephedrine, and phenylephrine) for 10 -14 
 Topical vasoconstrictors (eg, oxymetazoline hydrochloride) for a maximum of 3 -5 days 
Antibiotic treatment is usually given for 14 days. Usual first -line therapy is with one of the fo llowing: 
 Amoxicillin, at double the usual dose (80 -90 mg/kg/d), especially in areas with known 
Streptococcus pneumoniae resistance 
 Clarithromycin 
 Azithromycin 
Second -line antibiotic should be considered for patients with any of the following: 
 Residence in communities with a high incidence of resistant organisms 
 Failure to respond within 48 -72 hours of commencement of therapy 
 Persistence of symptoms beyond 10 -14 days 
The most commonly used second -line therapies include the following: 
 Amoxicillin -clavulanate 
 Second - or third -generation cephalosporins (eg, cefuroxime, cefpodoxime, cefdinir) 
 Macrolides (ie, clarithromycin) 
Antibiotic selection with respect to previous antibiotic use and disease severity is as follows: 
 Adults with mild disease who hav e not received antibiotics: Amoxicillin/clavulanate, amoxicillin 
(1.5-3.5 g/day), cefpodoxime proxetil, or cefuroxime is recommended as initial therapy. 
 Adults with mild disease who have had antibiotics in the previous 4 -6 weeks and adults with 
moderate d isease: Amoxicillin/clavulanate, amoxicillin (3 -3.5 g), cefpodoxime proxetil, or 
cefixime is recommended. 
 Adults with moderate disease who have received antibiotics in the previous 4 -6 weeks: 
Amoxicillin/clavulanate, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or doxycyc line is recommended. 
Symptomatic or adjunctive therapies may include the following: 
 Humidification/vaporizer 
  Warm compresses 
 Adequate hydration 
 Smoking cessation 
 Balanced nutrition 
 Nonnarcotic analgesia 
Most patients with acute sinusitis are treat ed in the primary care setting. Further evaluation by an 
otolaryngologist is recommended when any of the following exist: 
 When continued deterioration occurs with appropriate antibiotic therapy 
 When episodes of sinusitis recur 
 When symptoms persist afte r 2 courses of antibiotic therapy 
 When comorbid immunodeficiency, nosocomial infection, or complications of sinusitis are 
While in the emergency department and upon discharge, patients may obtain significant immediate 
relief with the administrati on of first -generation antihistamines, decongestants, and nonsteroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs 
Antibiotic therapy 
 In adults : 
Antibiotic therapy is indicated if the patient meets the c riteria of duration or severity of symptoms. Oral 
amoxicill in is the f irst-line treatment. If the diagnosis is uncertain (moderate symptoms < 10 days) and 
the patient can be re-examined in the next few days, start with a symptomatic treatment, as for 
rhinopharyngitis or viral sinusitis. 
In children : 
Antibiotic the rapy is indicated if the child has s evere symptoms or mild symptoms associated with risk 
factors (e.g. immunosuppression, sickle cell disease, asthma). 
Oral amoxicillin is the first -line treatment. 
Amoxicillin PO for 7 to 10 days: 
- Children: 80 to 90 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses 
- Adults: 3 g/day in 3 divided doses 
In the event of failure to respond within 48 hours of therapy: 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO for 7 to 10 days (the dose is expressed in amoxicillin): 
Children < 40 kg: 45 to 50 mg/kg/d ay in 2 divided doses (if using ratio 8:1 or 7:1) or in 3 divided doses (if 
using ratio 4:1) 
The dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 12.5 mg/kg/day or 375 mg/day. 
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 1500 to 2000 mg/day depending on the formulation 
available: 
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg/day = 2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times per day 
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg/day = 1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times per day 
Ratio 4:1: 1500 mg/day = 1 tablet of 500/125 mg 3 times per day 
The dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 375 mg/day. 
In penicillin -allergic patients: 
Erythromycin PO for 7 to 10 days: 
Children: 30 to 50 mg/kg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses 
Adults: 2 to 3 g/day in 2 to 3 divide d doses 
In infants with ethmoiditis, immediate treatment is necessary: admit the patient to the nearest hospital 
 ACUTE LARYNGITIS 
Laryngitis, an inflammation of the larynx, manifests in both acute and chronic forms. 
Acute laryngitis has an abrupt onse t and is usually self -limited. If a patient has symptoms of laryngitis for 
more than 3 weeks, the condition is classified as chronic laryngitis. The etiology of acute laryngitis 
includes vocal misuse, exposure to noxious agents, or infectious agents leadin g to upper respiratory 
tract infections. The infectious agents are most often viral but sometimes bacterial. 
Because acute laryngitis is usually self -limited and treated with conservative measures, significant 
morbidity and mortality are not encountered. 
Symptoms of laryngitis can begin suddenly and usually get worse over a period of two to three 
days. Common symptoms of laryngitis include: 
 hoarseness 
 difficulty speaking 
 sore throat 
 mild fever 
 irritating cough 
 a constant need to clear your throat 
Treatm ent & Management 
Vaughan states that patients know that laryngitis treatment requires only time and the common -sense 
avoidance of vocal excess and other irritants. The following measures can help lessen the intensity of 
the laryngitis while waiting for the condition to resolve: 
 Inhaling humidified air promotes moisture of the upper airway, helping to clear secretions and 
 Complete voice rest is suggested, although this recommendation is nearly impossible to follow. 
If the patient must speak, soft s ighing phonation is best. Avoidance of whispering is best, as 
whispering promotes hyperfunctioning of the larynx. 
 Prevailing data do not support the use of antihistamines and corticosteroids. If a patient uses 
these medications, he or she may have the fal se impression that the laryngitis is resolving and 
may continue to use his or her voice, leading to further insult. The drying effect of these 
medicines may also be deleterious. 
The treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) –related laryngitic conditions includes dietary 
and lifestyle modifications as well as antireflux medications. Antacid medications that suppress acid 
production, such as H2 -receptor and proton pump blocking agents, are highly effective against 
gastroesophageal reflux. 
Spasmo dic laryngitisin a child with rhinitis or measles : sudden, nocturnal onset with coughing fits 
followed by periods of suffocatio n and inspiratory dyspnoea. The child may develop stridor. The voice 
remains hoarse after the attack. The c hild remains afebrile. 
• Monitor the child, try to keep him calm. Have him breathe in a humid environment (near a bowl of 
water or wet towel). 
• Nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride or Ring er Lactate, 4 to 6 times/day to clear the airway. 
• An antih istamine may be given for 3 days (promet hazine PO or chlorphenamine PO ). 
• In children with severe dyspnea: 
Dexamethasone IM: 0. 1 to 0.2 mg/kg as a single dose or hydrocortisone IM: 1 mg/kg as a single dose 
 PHARYNGITIS 
Viral Pharyngitis 
Viral pharyn gitis can be caused by numerous viruses. Acute pharyngitis is an inflammatory syndrome of 
the pharynx and/or tonsils caused by several different groups of microorganisms. Pharyngitis can be part 
of a generalized upper respiratory tract infection or a speci fic infection localized in the pharynx. 
Pharyngitis in the common cold syndrome 
Sore throat is usually not the primary symptom. Nasal symptoms, such as sneezing, watery nasal 
discharge, nasal congestion, or postnasal discharge, tend to precede throat symp toms. Throat 
symptoms can be in the form of soreness, scratchiness, or irritation. Nasal discharge may be thick and 
yellow. Nonproductive cough may be present. Fever, if present, is usually low grade and is more 
prominent in young children than in adults. 
Pharyngitis caused by adenovirus 
Pharyngitis caused by adenovirus is common among young children and military recruits. Patients with 
pharyngitis present with sore throat (more intense than that of a common cold), high fever, dysphagia, 
and red eyes . This syndrome is named pharyngoconjunctival fever. 
Pharyngitis associated with EBV infectious mononucleosis 
EBV infectious mononucleosis is most commonly observed in adolescents and young adults. Sore throat 
and fatigue are the most common symptoms. Pharyngea l symptoms are usually associated with other 
features of the disease (eg, fatigue, skin rash, anorexia). 
Pharyngitis with influenza 
Sore throat is the chief symptom in some patients with influenza. The onset of illness is usually abrupt, 
with myalgia, he adache, fever, chills, and dry cough. The pharyngitis usually resolves in 3 -4 days. 
Treatment & Management 
Analgesics and antipyretics may be used for relief o f pain or pyrexia. Parcetamol is the drug of choice. 
Traditionally, aspirin has been used, but i t may increase viral shedding. Aspirin should not be used in 
children or adolescents, especially with influenza, because of its association with Reye syndrome. 
Antibiotics do not hasten recovery or reduce the frequency of bacterial complications. 
Drinking large amounts of fluid is recommended . 
 Bacterial Pharyngitis 
The most common and important bacterial cause of pharyngitis is Streptococcus pyogenes . 
When suspected, bacterial pharyngitis should be confirmed with routine diagnostic tests and treated 
with various antibiotics. 
Clinical Presentation 
The signs and symptoms listed below may be seen with many non -GABHS etiologies. Furthermore, 
individuals with GABHS pharyngitis may have only a few or mild features listed. Conjunctivitis, cough, 
hoarseness, coryza, diarrhea, anterior stomatitis, discrete ulcerative lesions, and a viral exanthem are all 
more consistent with an etiology other than GABHS, particularly viral. 
 Sore throat, usually with sudden onset 
 Odynophagia 
 Headache 
 Nausea, vomiting , and abdominal pain 
Physical examination may reveal the following: 
 Tonsillopharyngeal erythema 
 Exudates (patchy and discrete) 
 Beefy red swollen uvula 
 Lymphadenopathy (tender anterior cervical nodes) 
 Petechiae on the palate 
 Scarlatiniform ras h 
Treatment & Management 
Treatment of GABHS pharyngitis should be initiated only after confirmation with a RADT or throat 
culture. Alternatively, treatment in high -risk patients may be started before throat culture results are 
available, but antibiotics should be stopped if the culture returns negative results. Even though most 
cases of GABHS pharyngitis resolve after 3 -4 days without treatment, antibiotics decrease the likelihood 
of local suppurative complications and acute rheumatic fever. Oral antibio tics should be administered 
for 10 days, although many recent studies show similar efficacy with shorter courses. Antibiotic therapy 
does not decrease the likelihood of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. 
Oral penicillin V remains the preferred antibiot ic to treat GABHS pharyngitis. Amoxicillin is often 
prescribed and is an acceptable first -line agent because of its narrow spectrum, the ease of once -daily 
dosing, and improved palatability, especially for children. Both antibiotics are equally efficacious . 
A first generation cephalosporin (Cephalexin, Cefadroxil) is a treatment alternative. In patients with 
history of severe or anaphylactic reactions to penicillin, macrolides such as azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
and erythromycin may be used, although resi stance has been reporte d. 
 The Joachim score diminishes empiric antibiotic use in settings where rapid testing for GAS is not 
available . 
Joachim score is ≤ 2: viral pharyngitis, which typically resolv es within a few days ( or weeks ): no 
antibiotic therapy. 
Joachim score is ≥ 3: administer antibio tic therapy for GAS pharyngitis 
Otitis Media 
OM is any inflammation of the middle ear . 
Signs and symptoms 
AOM implies rapid onset of disease associa ted with one or more of the following symptoms: 
 Otorrhea 
 Headache 
 Irritability 
 Loss of appetite 
 Vomiting 
 Diarrhea 
OME often follows an episode of AOM. Symptoms that may be indicative of OME include the following: 
 Hearing loss 
 Tinnit us 
OME does not benefit from antibiotic treatment. Therefore, it is critical for clinicians to be able to 
distinguish normal middle ear status from OME or AOM. Doing so will avoid unnecessary use of 
antibiotics, which leads to increased adverse effects of medication and facilitates the development of 
antimicrobial resistance. 
Examination 
Pneumatic otoscopy remains the standard examination technique for patients with suspected OM. In 
addition to a carefully documented examinatio n of the external ear and TM, examining the entire head 
and neck region of patients with suspected OM is important. 
Every examination should include an evaluation and description of the following four TM characteristics: 
 Color – A normal TM is a transluce nt pale gray; an opaque yellow or blue TM is consistent with 
 Position – In AOM, the TM is usually bulging; in OME, the TM is typically retracted or in the 
neutral position 
 Mobility – Impaired mobility is the most consistent finding in patients with OM E 
 Perforation – Single perforations are most common 
Management 
Most cases of AOM improve spontaneously. Cases that require treatment may be managed with 
antibiotics and analgesics or with observation alone. 
The recommendations offer more rigorous diag nostic criteria to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use. 
According to the guidelines, management of AOM should include an assessment of pain. Analge sics, 
particularly paracetamol and ibuprofen, should be used to treat pain whether antibiotic therapy is or is 
not prescribed. 
 Recommendations for prescribing antibiotics include the following: 
 Antibiotics should be prescribed for bilateral or unilateral AOM in children aged at least 6 
months with severe signs or symptoms (moderate or severe otalgia, otalgia f or 48 hours or 
longer, or temperature 39°C or higher) and for nonsevere, bilateral AOM in children aged 6 to 
 On the basis of joint decision -making with the parents, unilateral, nonsevere AOM in children 
aged 6 -23 months or nonsevere AOM in older children may be managed either with antibiotics 
or with close follow -up and withholding antibiotics unless the child worsens or does not improve 
within 48 -72 hours of symptom onset 
 Amoxicillin (for empiric treatment from 40 -45 mg/kg/day to 80 -90 mg/kg/da y because of 
concerns about increasingly resistant strains of S pneumoniae, which are theoretically 
susceptible to this higher dose) is the antibiotic of choice unless the child received it within 30 
days, has concurrent purulent conjunctivitis, or is aller gic to penicillin; in these cases, clinicians 
should prescribe an antibiotic with additional beta -lactamase coverage 
Stressing the importance of documenting true clinical failure of therapy after at least 3 days of 
treatment with high -dose amoxicillin, th e working group suggests tympanocentesis for identification 
and susceptibility testing of the etiologic bacteria to guide alternate antibiotic therapy. 
In cases where second -line therapy is empirically chosen (a common occurrence, because few primary 
care physicians routinely perform tympanocentesis in the office), the recommendations suggest 
administering the following three preparations: 
 High -dose oral amoxicillin -clavulanate (80 -90 mg/kg/day of amoxicillin component, 6.4 
mg/kg/day of clavulanate compone nt) 
 Oral cefuroxime axetil (suspension, 30 mg/mg/day; tablet, 250 mg twice daily) 
Medical therapy for otitis media with effusion 
Most cases of OME occur after an episode of AOM, and 67% of patients develop a middl e ear effusion 
The following are am ong the many strategies advocated for medical treatment in patients with OME: 
 Antimicrobials 
 Antihistamine -decongestants 
 Intranasal and systemic steroids 
 Mucolytics 
 Aggressive management of allergic symptoms 
Of these options, only antimicrobia l therapy has provided measurable benefits. 
Selection of an antibiotic agent should be individualized to the patient. 
If penicillin allergy is not a concern and if the patient has no recent exposure to antibiotics, a reasonable 
choice for initial therapy is amoxicillin, administered at the same high dose recommended by the CDC 
for AOM (ie, 80 -90 mg/kg/day). Duration of therapy; 10 days is reasonable for amoxicillin, amoxicillin -
clavulanate, and cephalosporins. 
The steroid regimen should be oral prednisone or prednisolone at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/day for 5 -7 days, 
administered in combination with a beta -lactam antibiotic. 
Steroids are contraindicated in patients with exposure to varicella who have not received the varicella 
vaccine because of the possibility of life -threatening disseminated disease. 
 BRONCHITIS 
Bronchitis is characterized by inflammation of the bronchial tubes (bronchi), the air passages that 
extend from the trachea into the small airways and alveoli. 
Signs and symptoms 
A complete history must be obtained, including information on exposure to toxic substances and 
smoking. Symptoms of bronchitis include the following: 
 Cough (the most commonly observed symptom) 
 Sputum production (clear, yellow, green, or even blood -tinged) 
 Fever (relatively unusual; in conjunction with cough, suggestive of influenza or pneumonia) 
 Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (rare) 
 General malaise and chest pain (in severe cases) 
 Dyspnea and cyanosis (only seen with underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD ] 
or another condition that impairs lung function) 
 Sore throat 
 Runny or stuffy nose 
 Headache 
 Muscle aches 
 Extreme fatigue 
Physical examination findings in acute bronchitis are variable and may include the following: 
 Diffuse wheezes, high -pitched con tinuous sounds, and the use of accessory muscles (in severe 
 Diffuse diminution of air intake or inspiratory stridor (indicative of bronchial or tracheal 
obstruction) 
 Sustained heave along the left sternal border (indicative of right ventricular hy pertrophy 
secondary to chronic bronchitis) 
 Clubbing on the digits and peripheral cyanosis (indicative of cystic fibrosis) 
 Bullous myringitis (suggestive of mycoplasmal pneumonia) 
 Conjunctivitis, adenopathy, and rhinorrhea (suggestive of adenoviral infec tion) 
Acute bronchitis 
Patients typically present with a cough that lasts more than 5 days and may be associated with sputum 
production. Cough usually resolves within 3 weeks but may linger for up to 8 weeks. 
 Acute bronchitis is typically caused by vir uses. 
 There is limited evidence to support the use of antibiotics for treating acute bronchitis in 
otherwise healthy adults. Antibiotic administration does not significantly alter presence of 
productive cough or activity limitations at follow -up doctor vi sits; however, there is a trend 
toward increased adverse effects with their use. 
 There may be a role for antibiotic treatment of acute bronchitis in the elderly with multiple 
comorbidities. 
 Symptomatic treatment includes the use of cough suppressants ( de xtromethorphan or 
codeine), mucolytics, and bronchodilators ( albuterol). 
 Patients without underlying heart or lung disease who present with a persistent cough lasting 
more than 14 days should be evaluated for pertussis. 
 Acute bacterial exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (ABECB) 
Bacterial pathogens are identified in less than half of all ABECB cases. The Anthonisen Criteria is typically 
used to qualify severity of acute exacerbations. Three clinical factors are considered: dyspnea, sputum 
volume, an d sputum purulence. Antibiotic treatment is recommended for moderate (2 of 3 symptoms) 
or severe (all 3 symptoms) exacerbations. Change in sputum color has also been recognized to be a 
strong predictor of presence of potentially pathologic microorganisms i n ABECB. Green and yellow 
sputum are more likely than white sputum to be culture positive. 
Mild ABECB: 
 No antibiotics recommended 
 Outpatient symptomatic therapy and monitor for worsening symptoms 
Moderate ABECB and/or any one of the following: age < 6 5 years, FEV1 >50% predicted, no cardiac 
disease, or < 3 exacerbations per year: 
 Azithromycin 500 mg PO on first day then 250 mg PO daily for next 4 days or 
 Clarithromycin 250 -500 mg PO BID for 7 -14 days or 
 Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 7 days or 
 Cefuro xime 250 -500 mg PO q12h for 10 days or 
 If recent antibiotic exposure within 3 months, use alternative class. 
Severe ABECB and/or anyone of the following: age ≥65 years, FEV1 ≤ 50% predicted, cardiac disease, or 
≥3 exacerbations per year: 
 Consider hospitalization. 
 Amoxicillin -clavulanate (875 mg/125 mg) 1 tablet PO BID for 7 -10 days or 
 Levofloxacin 500 mg PO dai ly for at least 7 days or 
 Gemifloxacin 320mg PO daily for 5 days or 
 If at risk for Pseudomonas infection consider sputum culture and treatment with ciprofloxacin 
500-750 mg PO BID for 7 -14 days. 
 If recent antibiotic exposure within 3 months, use alterna tive class. 
 PEDIATRIC BRONCHITIS 
Acute bronchitis is a clinical syndrome produced by inflammation of the trachea, bronchi, and 
bronchioles. In children, acute bronchitis usually occurs in association with viral respiratory tract 
infection. 
Symptoms of acute bronchitis usually include productive cough and sometimes retrosternal pain during 
deep breathing or coughing. 
Generally, the clinical course of acute bronchitis is self -limited, with complete healing and full return to 
functi on typically seen within 10 -14 days following symptom onset . 
Chronic bronchitis is recurring inflammation and degeneration of the bronchial tubes that may be 
associated with active infection. Patients with chronic bronchitis have more mucus than normal . Chronic 
bronchitis is often associated with asthma, cystic fibrosis, dyskinetic cilia syndrome, foreign body 
aspiration, or exposure to an airway irritant. 
Physical Examination 
Lungs may sound normal. Crackles, rhonchi, or large airway wheezing, if any, ten d to be scattered and 
bilateral. The pharynx may be injected. 
Treatment & Management 
Emergency care for acute bronchitis or exacerbation of chronic bronchitis must focus on ensuring that 
the child has adequate oxygenation. Outpatient care is appropriate u nless bronchitis is complicated by 
severe underlying disease. General measures include rest, use of antipyretics, adequate hydration, and 
avoidance of smoke. 
Febrile patients should increase oral fluid intake. Instruct the patient to rest until the fever subsides. 
Pharmacologic Therapy 
 Fever: paracetamol PO 
 Keep the patient hydrated, humidify air (with a bowl of water or a wet towel). 
 Nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride or Ringer Lactate, 4 to 6 times/day to clear the 
 Amoxicillin PO 100 m g/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 5 days 
If the patient has dyspnoea, fever greater than 38.5 °C and purulent expectorations: a secondary 
infection with Haemophilus influenzae or with pneumococcus is probable. 
Acute bronchitis 
In otherwise healthy individua ls, the use of antibiotics has not demonstrated any consistent benefit in 
relieving symptoms or improving the natural history of acute bronchitis. 
Medical therapy generally targets symptoms and includes use of analgesics and antipyretics. 
Antitussives and expectorants are often prescribed but have not been demonstrated to be useful. 
Chronic bronchitis 
Antibiotics should not be the primary therapy. They usually do not result in a cure and may delay the 
start of more appropriate asthma therapies. However, a ntibiotics may be appropriate in children with 
chronic wet cough and symptoms persisting beyond 2 -4 weeks, most of whom have protracted bacterial 
bronchitis. 
Bronchodilator therapy should be considered and instituted; a beta -adrenergic agonist, such as 
albuterol or terbutaline may be effective. 
 In the child who continues to cough despite a trial of bronchodilators and in whom the history and 
physical examination suggest a wheezy form of bronchitis, corticosteroids should be added. Short 
courses of dexameth asone (1 -2 dose sch edules) have been shown to be effective . 
 BRONCHIOLITIS 
Bronchiolitis is an acute inflammatory injury of the bronchioles that is usua lly caused by a viral infection. 
This condition may o ccur in persons of any age, but severe symptoms are usually evident only in young 
Signs and symptoms 
Because bronchiolitis primarily affects young infants, clinical manifestations are initially subtle, such as 
the following: 
 May become increasing ly fussy and have difficulty feeding during the 2 to 5 -day incubation 
 Low-grade fever (usually < 38.6 C ); possible hypothermia in infants younger than 1 month 
 Increasing coryza and congestion 
 Apnea: May be the presenting symptom in early disease 
Severe cases of bronchiolitis may progress over 48 hours to the following signs and symptoms: 
 Respiratory distress with tachypnea, nasal flaring, retractions 
 Irritability 
 Possibly cyanosis 
The diagnosis of bronchiolitis is based on clinical presentation, the patient’s age, seasonal occurrence, 
and findings from the physical examination, which may reveal the following: 
 Tachypnea 
 Tachycardia 
 Fever (38 -39°C) 
 Retractions 
 Fine rales (47%); diffuse, fine wheezing 
 Otitis media 
Signs of severity: 
 Significant deterioration in general condition, toxic appearance (pallor, greyish colouration) 
 Apnoea, cyanosis (check lips, buccal mucosa, fingernails) 
 Respiratory distress (nasal flaring, sternal and chest wall indrawing) 
 Anxiety and agitat ion (hypoxia), altered level of consciousness 
 Respiratory rate > 60/min 
 Decreased respiratory distress and slow respirations (< 30/min below the age of 1 year and < 
20/min below the age of 3 years, exhaustion). Exercise caution in interpreting these signs as 
indicators of clinical improvement. 
 Sweats, tachycardia at rest and in the absence of fever 
 Silence on auscultation (severe bronchospasm) 
 Difficulty drinking or sucking (reduced tolerance for exertion) 
Management 
Hospitalise children with one of the f ollowing criteria: 
 Presence of any sign of severity 
 Pre-existing pathology (cardiac or pulmonary disease, malnutrition, HIV, etc.) 
Consider hospitalisation on a case -by-case basis in the following situations: 
 Associated acute pathology (viral gastro -enter itis, bacterial infection, etc.) 
  Age less than 3 months 
Among numerous medications and interventions used to treat bronchiolitis, thus far, only oxygen 
appreciably improves the condition of young children. Therefore, therapy is directed toward 
symptomatic relief and maintenance of hydration and oxygenation. 
Outpatient treatment 
– Nasal irrigation with 0.9% NaCl before each feeding (demonstrate the technique to the mother). 
– Small, frequent feedings to reduce vomiting triggered by bouts of coughing. 
– Increased fluids if fever and/or significant secretions are present. 
– Treat fever. 
– Handle the patient the patient as little as possible and avoid unnecessary procedures. 
Nonpharmacotherapy 
Supportive care for patients with bronchiolitis may include the fo llowing: 
 Supplemental humidified oxygen 
 Maintenance of hydration 
 Mechanical ventilation 
 Nasal and oral suctioning 
 Apnea and cardiorespiratory monitoring 
 Temperature regulation in small infants 
Pharmacotherapy 
Medications have a limited role in the t reatment of bronchiolitis. Healthy children with bronchiolitis 
usually have limited disease and usually do well with supportive care only. 
The following medications are used in selected patients with bronchiolitis: 
 Alpha/beta agonists (eg, racemic epinephr ine, albuterol) 
 Antibiotics (eg, ampicillin, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone) 
 Intranasal decongestants (eg, oxymetazoline) 
 Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, methylprednisolone) 
Bronchodilato rs should not be routinely used. 
Supplemental oxygen should be supplie d for saturations below 90% on pulse oximetry; saturation 
measurement is otherwise unnecessary . 
Viral Pneumonia 
Signs and symptoms 
The common constitutional symptoms of viral pneumonia are as follows: 
 Nonprod uctive cough 
 Rhinitis 
 Myalgias 
 Headaches 
During physical examination, the patient may also display the following: 
 Tachypnea and/or dyspnea 
 Tachycardia or bradycardia 
 Wheezing 
 Sternal or intercostal retractions 
 Dullness to percussion 
 Decreased breath sounds 
 Pleurisy 
 Pleural friction rub 
 Cyanosis 
 Acute respiratory distress 
The influenza viruses are the most common viral cause of pneumonia. Primary influenza pneumonia 
manifests with persistent symptoms of cough, s ore throat, headache, myalgia, and malaise for more 
than three to five days. The symptoms may worsen with time, and new respiratory signs and symptoms, 
such as dyspnea and cyanosis, appear. 
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most frequent cause of l ower respiratory tract infection in infants 
and children and the second most common viral cause of pneumonia in adults. 
Patients with RSV pneumonia typically present with fever, nonproductive cough, otalgia, anorexia, and 
dyspnea. Wheezes, rales, and rhon chi are common physical findings. 
 Bacterial Pneumonia 
Signs and symptoms 
On pulmonary auscultation: decreased vesicular breath sounds, dullness, localized foci of crepitation, 
sometimes bronchial wheeze. 
Cough, particularly cough productive of sputum, is the most consistent presenting symptom of bacterial 
pneumonia and may suggest a particular pathogen, as follows: 
 Streptococcus pneumoniae: Rust -colored sputum 
 Pseudomonas , Haemophilus , and pneumococcal species: May produce green sputum 
 Klebsiella species pneumonia: Red currant -jelly sputum 
 Anaerobic infections: Often produce foul -smelling or bad -tasting sputum 
Signs of bacterial pneumonia may include the following: 
 Hyperthermia (fever, typically >38°C) or hypothermia (< 35°C) 
 Tachypnea (>18 respirations/min) 
 Use of accessory respiratory muscles 
 Tachycardia (>100 bpm) or bradycardia (< 60 bpm) 
 Central cyanosis 
 Altered mental status 
Physical findings may include the following: 
 Adventitious breath sounds, such as rales/crackles, rhon chi, or wheezes 
 Decreased intensity of breath sounds 
 Egophony 
 Whispering pectoriloquy 
 Dullness to percussion 
 Tracheal deviation 
 Lymphadenopathy 
 Pleural friction rub 
Examination findings that may indicate a specific etiology include the following: 
 Bradycardia: May indicate a Legionella etiology 
 Periodontal disease: May suggest an anaerobic and/or polymicrobial infection 
 Bullous myringitis: May indicate Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection 
 Cutaneous nodules: May suggest Nocardia infection 
 Decreased ga g reflex: Suggests risk for aspiration 
Consider hospitalization 
 Pediatric Pneumonia 
Signs and symptoms 
Pneumonia can occur at any age, although it is more common in younger children. 
Newborns with pneumonia commonly present with : poor fee ding and irritability, as well as tachypnea, 
retractions, grunting, and hypoxemia. 
Cough is the most common symptom of pneumonia in infants, along with tachypnea, retractions, and 
hypoxemia. These may be accompanied by congestion, fever, irritability, and decreased feeding. 
Adolescents experience similar symptoms to younger children. They may have other constitutional 
symptoms, such as headache, pleuritic chest pain, and vague abdominal pain. Vomiting, diarrhea, 
pharyngitis, and otalgia/otitis are also comm on in this age group. 
The signs and symptoms of pneumonia are often nonspecific and widely vary based on the patient’s age 
and the infectious organisms involved. 
Observing the child’s respiratory effort during a physical exam is an important fi rst step in diagnosing 
pneumonia. The World Health Organization (WHO) respiratory rate thresholds for identifying children 
with pneumonia are as follows: 
 Children younger than 2 months: Greater than or equal to 60 breaths/min 
 Children aged 2 -11 months: G reater than or equal to 50 breaths/min 
 Children aged 12 -59 months: Greater than or equal to 40 breaths/min 
Assessment of oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry should be performed early in the evaluation when 
respiratory symptoms are present. Cyanosis may be present in severe cases. Capnography may be useful 
in the evaluation of children with potential respiratory compromise. 
Management 
Initial priorities in children with pneumonia include the identification and treatment of respiratory 
distress, hypoxem ia, and hypercarbia. Grunting, flaring, severe tachypnea, and retractions should 
prompt immediate respiratory support. Children who are in severe respiratory distress should undergo 
tracheal intubation if they are unable to maintain oxygenation or have dec reasing levels of 
consciousness. 
Signs of serious illness (severe pneumonia) include : 
 Chest in drawing: the inferior thoracic wall depresses on inspiration as the superior abdomen 
 Cyanosis (lips, oral mucosa, fingernails) or O 2 saturation < 90% 
 Nasal flaring 
 Altered consciousness (child is abnormally sleepy or difficult to wake) 
 Stridor (hoarse noise on inspiration) 
 Grunting (a short repetitive noise produced by a partial closure of the vocal cords) on expiration 
 Refusal to drink or feed 
 Children under 2 months 
 Severe malnutrition 
Consider hospitalization 
RED FLAG - Caution 
 In malnourished children, the RR thresholds should be decreased by 5 breaths/minute from 
those listed above. 
  Chest in drawing is significant if it is clearly visible and prese nt at all times. If it is observed when 
a child is upset or feeding and is not visible when the child is resting, there is no chest in 
 In children under 2 months of age, moderate chest in drawing is normal as the thoracic wall is 
 Tubercu losis: 
 in a child with cough, fever and poor weight gain and a history of close contact with a 
tuberculous patient. 
 in the event of pneumonia complicated with empyema 
The treatment is administered by parenteral route for at least 3 days then; if the clin ical condition has 
improved and oral treatment can be tolerated, switch to the oral route with amoxicillin PO: 100 
mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses, to complete 10 days of treatment. 
Pneumonia with no signs of serious illness 
Infant under 3 months of age 
Adm it the child for inpatient care and treat for severe pneumonia 
Children from 2 months to 5 years of age (outpatients, except young infants) 
amoxicillin PO: 100 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 5 days 
Follow -up in 48 to 72 hours or sooner if the child ’s condition deteriorates: 
 if the condition is improving: continue with the same antibiotic to complete treatment. 
 if there is no improvement after 3 days of correct administration: add azithromycin 
 if the condition is deteriorating: hospitalize and treat as se vere pneumonia. 
Pneumonia in children over 5 years. 
Consider hospitalization 
Signs of serious illness (severe pneumonia) include: 
 cyanosis (lips, oral mucosa, fingernails) 
 nasal flaring 
 intercostal or subclavian in drawing 
 RR > 30 breaths/minute 
 heart rate > 125 beats/minute 
 altered level of consciousness (drowsiness, confusion) 
 RED FLAG - Caution 
 Sudden onset with high fever (higher than 39 °C), thoracic pain and oral herpes are suggestive of 
pneumococcal infection. Symptoms may be confu sing, particularly in children with abdominal 
pain, meningeal syndrome. 
 Patients at risk include the elderly, patients suffering from heart failure, sickle cell disease or 
severe chronic bronchitis; immunocompromised patients 
Pneumonia without signs of s erious illness 
Amoxicillin PO 
Children: 100 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses for 5 days 
Adults: 3 g/day in 3 divided doses for 5 days 
Follow -up in 48 to 72 hours or sooner if the patient ’s condition deteriorates: 
 if the patient is improving10: continue with th e same antibiotic to complete treatment; 
 if the condition is deteriorating: hospitalise and treat as severe pneumonia; 
 If there is no improvement after 3 days of correct administration: add azithromycin 
For Adul ts and Children Older than 5 Years 
Asthma is a common and potentially serious chronic disease that imposes a substantial burden on 
patients, their families and the community. It causes respiratory symptoms, limitation of activity, and 
flare -ups (attacks) that sometimes require urgent health care and may be fatal . 
Asthma causes symptoms such as wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness and cough that vary 
over time in their occurrence, frequency and intensity. 
These symptoms are associated with varia ble expiratory airflow, i.e. difficulty breathing air out of the 
lungs due to bronchoconstriction (airway narrowing), airway wall thickening, and increased mucus. 
Some variation in airflow can also occur in people without asthma, but it is greater in asthm a. 
Factors that may trigger or worsen asthma symptoms include viral infections, domestic or occupational 
allergens (e.g. house dust mite, pollens, and cockroach), tobacco smoke, exercise and stress. These 
responses are more likely when asthma is uncontrol led. Some drugs can induce or trigger asthma, e.g. 
beta -blockers, and (in some patients), aspirin or other NSAIDs. 
DIAGNOSIS OF ASTHMA 
Asthma is a disease with many variations (heterogeneous), usually characterized by chronic airway 
inflammation. Asthma h as two key defining features: 
 A history of respiratory symptoms such as wheeze, shortness of breath, chest tightness and 
cough that vary over time and in intensity, AND 
 Variable expiratory airflow limitation. 
Diagnostic flow -chart for asthma in clinical practice 
The diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed and, for future reference, the evidence documented in 
the patient’s notes. Depending on clinical urgency and access to resources, this should preferably be 
done before starting controller treatment. Confirming the diagnosis of asthma is more difficult after 
treatment has been started . 
 CRITERIA FOR MAKING THE DIAGNOSIS OF ASTHMA 
1. A history of variable respiratory symptoms 
Typical symptoms are whe eze, shortness of breath, chest tightness, cough 
• People with asthma generally have more than one of these symptoms 
• The symptoms occur variably over time and vary in intensity 
• The symptoms often occur or are worse at night or on waking 
• Symptoms are often triggered by exercise, laughter, allergens or cold air 
• Symptoms often occur with or worsen with viral infections 
2. Evidence of variable expiratory airflow limitation 
• At least once during the diagnostic process wh en FEV1 is low, document that the 
FEV1/FVC ratio is reduced. The FEV1/FVC ratio is normally more than 0.75 –0.80 in adults, 
and more than 0.90 in children. 
• Document that variation in lung function is greater than in healthy people. For example: 
o FEV1 i ncreases by more than 12% and 200mL (in children, >12% of the predicted value) 
after inhaling a bronchodilator. This is called ‘bronchodilator reversibility’. 
o Average daily diurnal PEF variability* is >10% (in children, >13%) 
o FEV1 increases by more t han 12% and 200mL from baseline (in children, by >12% of the 
predicted value) after 4 weeks of anti -inflammatory treatment (outside respiratory 
infections) 
• The greater the variation, or the more times excess variation is seen, the more confident 
you can be of the diagnosis 
• Testing may need to be repeated during symptoms, in the early morning, or after 
withholding bronchodilator medications. 
• Bronchodilator reversibility may be absent during severe exacerbations or viral infections. 
If bronchodilator reversibility is not present when it is first tested, the next step depends on 
the clinical urgency and availability of other tests. 
• For other tests to assist in diagnosis, including bronchial challenge tests 
Physical examination in people with ast hma is often normal, but the most frequent finding is wheezing 
on auscultation, especially on forced expiration. 
Patients with cough as the only respiratory symptom 
This may be due to chronic upper airway cough syndrome (‘post -nasal drip’), chronic sinu sitis, 
gastroesophageal reflux (GERD), vocal cord dysfunction, or eosinophilic bronchitis, or cough variant 
asthma. Cough variant asthma is characterized by cough and airway hyperresponsiveness, and 
documenting variability in lung function is essential to make this diagnosis. However, lack of variability 
at the time of testing does not exclude asthma. 
 How to assess a patient with asthma 
Asthma control – assess both symptom control and risk factors 
• Assess symptom control over the last 4 w eeks 
• Identify any other risk fa ctors for poor outcomes 
• Measure lung function before starting treatment, 3 –6 months later, and then 
periodically, e.g. yearly 
2. Treatment issues 
• Record the patient’s treatment , and ask about side -effects 
• Watch t he patient using their inhaler, to check their technique 
• Have an open empathic d iscussion about adherence 
• Check that the patient has a w ritten asthma action plan 
• Ask the patient about their attitudes and goals for their asthma 
3. Are there any comorbidities? 
• These include rhinitis, rhinosinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux (GERD), obesity, 
obstructive sleep apnea, depression and anxiety. 
• Comorbidities should be identified as they may contribute to respiratory symptoms and 
poor quality of l ife. Their treatment may complicate asthma management. 
Asthma control means the extent to which the effects of asthma can be seen in the patient, or have 
been reduced or removed by treatment. Asthma control has two domains: symptom control (previously 
called ‘current clinical control’) and risk factors for future poor outcomes. 
Poor symptom control is a burden to patients and a risk factor for flare -ups. Risk factors are factors that 
increase the patient’s future risk of having exacerbations (flare -ups), loss of lung function, or medication 
side-effects. 
 Assessment of symptom control and future risk 
Level of asthma symptom control 
In the past 4 weeks, has the patient had : Well 
controlled Partly 
controlled Uncontrolled 
Daytime symptoms more than twice/week? Yes No None of these 1–2 of these 3–4 of these 
Any night waking due to asthma? Yes No 
Reliever needed* more than twice/week? Yes No 
Any activity limitation due to asthma? Yes No 
Risk factors for poor asthma outcomes 
Assess risk factors at diagnosis and periodically, particularly for patients experiencing exacerbations. 
Measure FEV1 at start of treatment, after 3 –6 months of controller treatment to record personal best lu ng function, 
then periodically for ongoing risk assessment. 
Potentially modifiable independent risk factors for exacerbations include: 
• Uncontrolled asthma symptoms (as above) 
• ICS not prescribed; poor ICS adherence; incorrect inhaler technique 
• High SABA use (with increased mortality if >1x200 -dose canister/month) 
• Low FEV1, especially if <60% predicted 
• Major psychological or socioeconomic problems 
• Exposures: smoking; allergen exposure if sensitized 
• Comorbidities: obesity; rhinosinusitis ; confirmed food allergy 
• Sputum or blood eosinophilia 
• Pregnancy 
Other major independent risk factors for flare -ups (exacerbations) include: 
• Ever being intubated or in intensive care for asthma 
• Having 1 or more severe exacerbations in the last 12 months. 
Having one or more of 
these risk factors 
increases the risk of 
exacerbations even if 
symptoms are well 
controlled 
Risk factors for developing fixed airflow limitation include lack of ICS treatment; exposure to tobacco smoke, 
noxious chemica ls or occupational exposures; low FEV1; chronic mucus hypersecretion; and sputum or blood 
eosinophilia 
Risk factors for medication side -effects include: 
• Systemic: frequent OCS; long -term, high dose and/or potent ICS; also taking P450 inhibitors 
• Loc al: high -dose or potent ICS; poor inhaler technique 
 How to investigate uncontrolled asthma in primary care 
 MANAGEMENT OF ASTHMA GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
The long -term goals of asthma management are symptom control and risk reduction. The aim is to 
reduce the burden to the patient and their risk of exacerbations, airway damage, and medication side -
The control -based asthma management cycle 
Asthma treatment is adjusted in a continuous cycle to assess , adjust treatment and review response 
INITIAL CONTROLLER TREATMENT 
For the best outcomes, regular daily controller treatment should be initiated as soon as possible after 
the diagnosis of asthma is made, because: 
• Early treatment with low dose ICS leads to bet ter lung function than if symptoms have been present 
for more than 2 –4 years 
• Patients not taking ICS who experience a severe exacerbation have lower long -term lung function than 
those who have started ICS 
• In occupational asthma, early removal from ex posure and early treatment increase the probability of 
Regular low dose ICS is recommended for patients with any of the following: 
• Asthma symptoms more than twice a month 
• Waking due to asthma more than once a month 
• Any asthma symptoms p lus any risk factor(s) for exacerbations (e.g. needing OCS for asthma within 
the last 12 months; low FEV1; ever in intensive care unit for asthma) 
Consider starting at a higher step (e.g. medium/high dose ICS, or ICS/LABA) if the patient has 
troublesome a sthma symptoms on most days; or is waking from asthma once or more a week, especially 
if there are any risk factors for exacerbations. 
If the initial asthma presentation is with severely uncontrolled asthma, or with an acute exacerbation, 
give a short cou rse of OCS and start regular controller treatment (e.g. high dose ICS, or medium dose 
ICS/LABA). 
 Before starting initial controller treatment 
• Record evidence for the diagnosis of asthma, if possible 
• Document symptom control and risk factors 
• Asses s lung function, when possible 
• Train the patient to use the inhaler correctly, and check their technique 
• Schedule a follow -up visit 
After starting initial controller treatment 
• Review response after 2 –3 months, or according to clinical urgency 
• See Box 7 for ongoing treatment and other key management issues 
• Consider step down when asthma has been well -controlled for 3 months 
*For children 6 –11 years, theophylline is not recommended, and the preferred Step 3 treatment is med ium dose ICS. **Low 
dose ICS/formoterol is the reliever medication for patients prescribed low dose budesonide/formoterol or low dose 
beclometasone/formoterol ## Tiotropium by soft -mist inhaler is an add -on treatment for patients with a history of 
exacerba tions; it is not indicated in children <18 years. 
 Low, medium and high daily doses of inhaled corticosteroids (mcg) 
corticosteroid Adults and adolescents 
 Children 6 –11 years 
 Low Medium High Low Medium High 
Beclometaso ne 
dipropionate 
Beclometasone 
dipropionate 
(HFA) 100–200 >200 –400 >400 50-100 >100 -200 >200 
Budesonide 
Budesonide 
Ciclesonide 
(HFA) 80–160 >160 –320 >320 80 >80-160 >160 
Fluticasone 
propionate( DPI) 100–250 >250 –500 >500 100–200 >200 –400 >400 
Fluticasone 
propionate 
Mom etasone 
furoate 110–220 >220 –440 >440 110 ≥220 –<440 ≥440 
Triamcinolone 
CFC: chlorofluorocarbon propellant; DPI: dry powder inhaler; HFA: hydrofluoroalkane propellant. 
STEPWISE APPROACH FOR ADJUSTING TREATMENT 
Once asthma tr eatment has been started, ongoing decisions are based on a cycle to assess, adjust 
treatment and review response. 
STEP 1 : As-needed SABA with no controller (this is indicated only if symptoms are rare, there is no night 
waking due to asthma, no exacerbati ons in the last year, and normal FEV1). 
Other options : regular low dose ICS for patients with exacerbation risks. 
STEP 2: Regular low dose ICS plus as -needed SABA 
Other options : LTRA are less effective than ICS; ICS/LABA leads to faster improvement in symptoms and 
FEV1 than ICS alone but are more expensive and the exacerbation rate is similar. For purely seasonal 
allergic asthma, start ICS immediately and cease 4 weeks after end of exposure. 
STEP 3: Low dose ICS/LABA either as maintenance treatment pl us as -needed SABA, or as 
ICS/formoterol maintenance and reliever therapy 
For patients with ≥1 exacerbation in the last year, low dose BDP/formoterol or BUD/formoterol 
maintenance and reliever strategy is more effective than maintenance ICS/LABA with as -needed SABA. 
Other options : Medium dose ICS 
Children (6 –11 years) : Medium dose ICS. Other options: low dose ICS/LABA 
STEP 4: Low dose ICS/formoterol maintenance and reliever therapy, or medium dose ICS/LABA as 
maintenance plus as -needed SABA 
 Other options : Add -on tiotropium by soft -mist inhaler for adults (≥18 years) with a hi story of 
exacerbations; high dose ICS/LABA, but more side -effects and little extra benefit; extra controller, e.g. 
LTRA or slow -release theophylline (adults) 
Children (6 –11 years): Refer for expert assessment and advice. 
STEP 5: Refer for expert investi gation and add -on treatment 
Add-on treatments include anti -IgE (omalizumab) for severe allergic asthma. Sputum -guided treatment, 
if available, improves outcomes. 
Other options : Add -on tiotropium by soft -mist inhaler for adults (≥18 years) with a history of 
exacerbations. Some patients may benefit from low dose OCS but long -term systemic side -effects occur. 
Patients should preferably be seen 1 –3 months after starting treatment and every 3 –12 months after 
that, except in pregnancy when they should be revie wed every 4 –6 weeks. After an exacerbation, a 
review visit within 1 week should be scheduled. 
Identifying patients at risk of asthma -related death 
These patients should be identified, and flagged for more frequent review. 
• A history of near -fatal asthm a requiring intubation and ventilation 
• Hospitalization or emergency care for asthma in last 12 months 
• Not currently using ICS, or poor adherence with ICS 
• Currently using or recently stopped using OCS (this indicates the severity of recent events) 
• Over -use of SABAs, especially more than 1 canister/month 
• Lack of a written asthma action plan 
• History of psychiatric disease or psychosocial problems 
• Confirmed food allergy in a patient with asthma 
 Summary of stepwise manageme nt in children less than 5 years 
Summary of stepwise management in children aged 5 -12 years 
 Summary of stepwise management in adults 
 Management of asthma exacerbations in primary care 
O2: oxygen; PEF: peak expiratory flow; SABA: short -acting beta2 -agonist (doses are for salbutamol) 
 Medications Action and use Adverse effects 
CONTROLLER MEDICATIONS 
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
(pMDIs or DPIs ) e.g. 
beclometasone, budesonide, 
ciclesonide, fluticasone 
propionate, fluticasone 
furoate, mometasone, 
triamcinolone The most effective anti -inflammatory 
medications for persistent asthma. ICS 
reduce symptoms, increase lung 
function, improve quality of l ife, and 
reduce the risk of exacerbations and 
asthma -related hospitalizations or 
death. ICS differ in their potency and 
bioavailability, but most of the benefit is 
seen at low doses (see Box 8 (p14) for 
low, medium and high doses of different 
ICS). Most p atients using ICS do not 
experience side -effects. Local 
side-effects include 
oropharyngeal candidiasis and 
dysphonia. Use of spacer with 
pMDI, and rinsing with water 
and spitting out after 
inhalation, reduce local side 
effects. High doses increase the 
risk of systemic side -effects. 
ICS and long -acting beta2 
agonist bronchodilator 
combinations (ICS/LABA) 
(pMDIs or DPIs) e.g. 
beclometasone/ formoterol, 
budesonide/formoterol, 
fluticasone furoate/ vilanterol, 
fluticasone 
propionate/formoterol, 
fluticasone pr opionate/ 
salmeterol, and 
mometasone/formoterol. When a medium dose of ICS alone fails 
to achieve good control of asthma, the 
addition of LABA to ICS improves 
symptoms, lung function and reduces 
exacerbations in more patients, more 
rapidly, than doubling the dose of ICS. 
Two regimens are available: 
maintenance ICS/LABA with SABA as 
reliever, and low -dose combination 
beclometasone or budesonide with 
formoterol for maintenance and reliever 
treatment. The LABA component may be 
associated with tachycardia, 
headache or cramps. Current 
recommendations are that 
LABA and ICS are safe for 
asthma when used in 
combination. Use of LABA 
without ICS in asthma is 
associated with increased risk 
of adverse outcomes. 
Leukotriene modifiers (tablets) 
e.g. montelukast, pranl ukast, 
zafirlukast, zileuton Target one part of the inflammatory 
pathway in asthma. Used as an option 
for controller therapy, particularly in 
children. Used alone: less effective than 
low dose ICS; added to ICS: less effective 
than ICS/LABA. Few side -effects except 
elevated liver function tests 
with zileuton and zafirlukast. 
Chromones (pMDIs or DPIs) 
e.g. sodium cromoglycate and 
nedocromil sodium Very limited role in long -term treatment 
of asthma. Weak anti -inflammatory 
effect, less effective than low -dose ICS. 
Require meticulous inhaler 
maintenance. Side effects are uncommon but 
include cough upon inhalation 
and pharyngeal discomfort. 
Anti -IgE (omalizumab) A treatment option for patients with 
severe persistent allergic asthma 
uncontrolled on Step 4 treatment (high 
dose ICS/LABA). Reactions at the site of injection 
are common but minor. 
Anaphylaxis is rare. 
Long -acting anticholinergic, 
tiotropium An add -on option at Step 4 or 5 bny soft -
mist inhaler for adults (≥18 years) whose 
asthma is uncontrolled by ICS ± LABA Side -effects are uncommon but 
include dry mouth 
Systemic corticosteroids 
(tablets,suspension or 
intramuscular (IM) or 
intravenous (I V) injection) e.g. 
prednisone, prednisolone, 
methylprednisolone, 
hydrocortisone Short -term treatment (usually 5 –7 days 
in adults) is important early in the 
treatment of severe acute 
exacerbations, with main effects seen 
after 4 –6 hours. Oral corticosteroi d 
(OCS) therapy is preferred and is as 
effective as IM or IV therapy in 
preventing relapse. Tapering is required 
if treatment given for more than 2 
Long -term treatment with OCS may be 
required for some patients with severe 
asthma. Short -term use: some adverse 
effects e.g. hyperglycaemia, 
gastro -intestinal side -effects, 
mood changes. 
Long -term use: limited by the 
risk of significant systemic 
adverse effects e.g. cataract, 
glaucoma, osteoporosis, 
adrenal suppression. Patients 
should be assessed for 
osteoporosis risk and treated 
appropriately. 
RELIEVER MEDICATIONS 
Short -acting inhaled beta2 -
agonist bronchodilators 
(SABA) (pMDIs, DPIs and, 
rarely, solution for nebulization 
or injection) e.g. salbutamol 
(albuterol), terbutaline. Inhaled SABAs are medications of choice 
for quick relief of asthma symptoms and 
bronchoconstriction including in acute 
exacerbations, and for pre -treatment of 
exercise -induced bronchoconstriction. 
SABAs should be used only as -needed at 
the lowest dose and frequency requ ired. Tremor and tachycardia are 
commonly reported with initial 
use of SABA, but tolerance to 
these effects usually develops 
rapidly. Excess use, or poor 
response indicate poor asthma 
Short -acting anticholinergics 
(pMDIs or DPIs) e.g. 
ipratropi um bromide, 
oxitropium bromide Long -term use: ipratropium is a less 
effective reliever medication than 
SABAs. Short -term use in acute asthma: 
inhaled ipratropium added to SABA 
reduces the risk of hospital admission Dryness of the mouth 
 TUBERCULOSIS 
Pulmonary tuberculosis is a bacterial infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis , spread by airborne 
route. After contamination, M. tuberculosis multiplies slowly in the lungs: this represents the primary 
infection . 
Signs and symptoms 
Classic clinical features associated with active pulmonary TB are as follows (elderly individuals with TB 
may not display typical signs and symptoms): 
 Weight loss/anorexia 
 Night sweats 
 Hemoptysis 
 Chest pain (can also result from tuberculous acute pericarditis) 
Symptoms of tuberculous meningitis may include the following: 
 Headache that has been either intermittent or persistent for 2 -3 weeks 
 Subtle mental status changes that may progress to coma over a period of days to weeks 
 Low-grade or absent fever 
Symptoms of skeletal TB may include the following: 
 Back pain or stiffness 
 Lower -extremity paralysis, in as many as half of patients with undiagnosed Pott disease 
 Tuberculous arthritis, usually involving only 1 joint (most often the hip or knee, followed by the 
ankle, elbow, wrist, and shoulder) 
Symptoms of genitourinary TB may include the following: 
 Flank pain 
 Frequent urination 
 In men, a painful scrotal mass, prostatitis, orchitis, or epididymitis 
 In women, symptoms mimicking pelvic inflammatory disease 
Symptoms of gastrointestinal TB are referable to the infected site and may include the following: 
 Nonhealing ulcers of the mouth or anus 
 Difficulty swallowing (with esophageal disease) 
 Abdominal pa in mimicking peptic ulcer disease (with gastric or duodenal infection) 
 Malabsorption (with infection of the small intestine) 
 Pain, diarrhea, or hematochezia (with infection of the colon) 
Physical examination findings associated with TB depend on the org ans involved. Patients with 
pulmonary TB may have the following: 
 Abnormal breath sounds, especially over the upper lobes or involved areas 
 Rales or bronchial breath signs, indicating lung consolidation 
Signs of extrapulmonary TB differ according to the t issues involved and may include the following: 
 Confusion 
 Neurologic deficit 
 Chorioretinitis 
 Lymphadenopathy 
 Cutaneous lesions 
The absence of any significant physical findings does not exclude active TB. Classic symptoms are often 
absent in high -risk patients, particularly those who are immunocompromised or elderly. 
The most commonly reported symptom of pulmonary tuberculosis is persistent cough that generally, 
but not always, is productive of mucus and sometimes blood (hemoptysis). In persons wit h tuberculosis 
 the cough is often accompanied by systemic symptoms such as fever, night sweats, and weight loss. In 
addition, findings such as lymphadenopathy consistent with concurrent extrapulmonary tuberculosis, 
may be noted, especially in patients with HIV infection. However, chronic cough with sputum production 
is not always present, even among persons having sputum smears showing acid -fast bacilli. 
Although many patients with pulmonary tuberculosis have cough, the symptom is not specific to 
tuberculos is; it can occur in a wide range of respiratory conditions, including acute respiratory tract 
infections, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Having cough of 2 weeks or more in 
duration serves as the criterion for defining suspected tubercul osis and is used in most national and 
international guidelines, particularly in areas of moderate to high prevalence of tuberculosis, as an 
indication to initiate an evaluation for the disease. 
Guidance on approach to diagnose TB in children 
1. Careful history (including history of TB contact and symptoms consistent with TB) 
2. Clinical examination (including growth assessment) 
3. Tuberculin skin testing 
4. Chest X -ray if available 
5. B acteriological confirmation whenever possible 
6. Investigatio ns relevant for suspected pulmonary TB and suspected extrapulmonary TB 
7. HIV testing 
WHO’s Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)121 program, which is widely used in first -
level facilities in low - and middle -income countries states that tubercu losis should be considered in any 
child with: 
• Unexplained weight loss or failure to grow normally; 
• Unexplained fever, especially when it continues for more than 2 weeks; 
• Chronic cough; 
• Exposure to an adult with probable or definite pulmonary infect ious tuberculosis. 
Findings on examination that suggest tuberculosis include: 
• Fluid on one side of the chest (reduced air entry, dullness to percussion); 
• Enlarged non -tender lymph nodes or a lymph node abscess, especially in the neck; 
• Signs of mening itis, especially when these develop over several days and the spinal fluid contains 
mostly lymphocytes and elevated protein; 
• Abdominal swelling, with or without palpable lumps; 
• Progressive swelling or deformity in the bone or a joint, including the spi ne. 
 Approach to evaluation and management of children in contact with an infectious case of tuberculosis 
when a tuberculin skin test and chest radiograph are not available 
 Doses of first -line antituberculosis drugs in adults and children 
* The recommended daily doses of all 4 antituberculosis medicines are higher in children who weigh less 
than 25 kg than in adults, because the pharmacokinetics are different (and to achieve the same plasma 
concentration as in adults, the doses need to be incr eased) 
** Same dosing for treatment of active disease and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection 
 BCG vaccination in neonates (0 –4 weeks) 
Identify and vaccinate pregnant women eligible for vaccination before the birth of their baby, ideally 
through antenatal services. 
Discuss neonatal BCG vaccination for any baby at increased risk of TB with the parents or legal guardian. 
Preferably vaccinate babies at increased risk of TB before discharge from hospital or before handover 
from midwifery to primary care. Otherwise, vaccinate as soon as possible afterwards, for example, at 
the 6 -week postnatal check. 
Provide education and training for postnatal ward staff, midwives, health visitors and other clinicians on 
identifying babies eligible for vacci nation, local service information and providing BCG vaccination, 
including: 
 case definition for at -risk groups to be offered vaccination 
 information about the local BCG vaccination policy that can be given verbally, in writing or in 
any other appropriate f ormat to parents and carers at the routine examination of the baby 
before discharge 
 local service information about BCG vaccination, such as pre -discharge availability of neonatal 
vaccination, local BCG clinics and referral for BCG vaccination if this is n ot available in maternity 
 administration of BCG vaccination and contraindications. 
Primary care organisations with a high incidence of TB should consider vaccinating all neonates soon 
after birth. 
In areas with a low incidence of TB (see Public H ealth England's TB rate bands, published in their Annual 
Report , primary care organisations should offer BCG vaccination to selected neonates who: 
 were born in an area with a high incidence of TB or 
 have 1 or more parents or grandparents who were born in a high -incidence country or 
 have a family history of TB in the past 5 years. 
BCG vaccination for infants (0 –5 years) and older children (6 –15 years) 
Routine BCG vaccination is not recommended for children aged 10 –14 years. 
 Healthcare professionals should o pportunistically identify unvaccinated children older than 
4 weeks and younger than 16 years at increased risk of TB who would have qualified for 
neonatal BCG (see recommendation 1.1.3.4) and provide Mantoux testing and BCG vaccination 
(if Mantoux -negative ). 
Mantoux testing should not be done routinely before BCG vaccination in children younger than 6 years 
unless they have a history of residence or prolonged stay (more than 1 month) in a country with a high 
incidence of TB. 
BCG vaccination for new entrant s from high -incidence areas 
 Offer BCG vaccination to new entrants who are Mantoux - or interferon -gamma release assay -negative 
 are from high -incidence countries and 
 are previously unvaccinated (that is, without adequate documentation or a BCG scar) and 
 are aged: 
o younger than 16 years or 
o 16–35 years from sub -Saharan Africa or a country with a TB incidence of 
500 per 100,000 or more. 
Encouraging uptake among infants, older children and new entrants 
Deliver the following interventions in primary care sett ings to improve uptake of BCG vaccination in 
people from eligible groups: 
 education and support for practice staff, including: 
o raising awareness of relevant guidelines and case definition for at -risk groups 
o promoting BCG and TB testing in eligible groups 
 incorporating reminders for staff (prompts about eligibility for BCG) on practice computers (for 
example, embedded in medical records) 
 consider financial incentives for practices for identifying eligible groups for BCG and TB testing 
 reminders ('immunisatio ns due') and recall ('immunisations overdue') for people who are 
eligible for vaccination or for parents of infants and children who are eligible, as outlined in the 
Green Book. (This could include written reminders, telephone calls from a member of staff or a 
computerised auto dialler, text messages or a combination of these approaches.) 
Use home visits to give information and advice to people who are disadvantaged on the importance of 
immunisation. This should be delivered by trained lay health workers, community -based healthcare staff 
or nurses. 
BCG vaccination for healthcare workers 
Offer BCG vaccination to healthcare workers and other NHS employees who have contact with patients 
or clinical specimens, irrespective of age, who: 
 are previously unvaccina ted (that is, without adequate documentation or a BCG scar) and 
 are Mantoux - (or interferon -gamma release assay -) negative 
BCG vaccination for contacts of people with active TB 
Offer BCG vaccination to Mantoux - (or interferon -gamma release assay -) negativ e contacts of people 
with pulmonary and laryngeal TB if they: 
  have not been vaccinated previously (that is, there is no adequate documentation or a BCG scar) 
 are aged 35 years or younger or 
 are aged 36 years and older and a healthcare or laboratory wor ker who has contact with 
patients or clinical materials. 
If a new employee from low-incidence setting, who has not had a BCG vaccination, has a positive 
Mantoux test and a positive interferon -gamma release assay, they should have a medical assessment 
and a chest X -ray. They should be referred to a TB clinic to determine whether they need TB treatment if 
the chest X -ray is abnormal, or to determine whether they need treatment of latent TB infection if the 
chest X -ray is normal. 
 GASTROIN TESTINAL DISORDERS 
 ACUTE DIARRHEA 
Diarrhea is the reversal of the normal net absorptive status of water and electrolyte absorption to 
secretion. The augmented water content in the stools (above the normal value of approximately 1 0 
mL/kg/d in the infant and young child, or 200 g/d in the teenager and adult) is due to an imbalance in 
the physiology of the small and large intestinal processes involved in the absorption of ions, organic 
substrates, and thus water. 
Causes of diarrhea w ith acute onset include the following: 
o Infections 
 Enteric infections (including food poisoning 
 Extraintestinal infections 
o Drug -induced 
 Antibiotic -associated 
 Laxatives 
 Antacids that contain magnesium 
 Opiate withdrawal 
 Other drugs 
o Food allergies or intoleran ces 
 Cow's milk protein allergy 
 Soy protein allergy 
 Multiple food allergies 
 Methylxanthines (caffeine, theobromine, theophylline) 
o Disorders of digestive/absorptive processes 
 Glucose -galactose malabsorption 
 Sucrase -isomaltase deficiency 
 Late -onset (a dult-type) hypolactasia, resulting in lactose intolerance 
o Chemotherapy or radiation -induced enteritis 
o Surgical conditions 
 Acute appendicitis 
 Intussusception 
o Vitamin deficiencies 
 Niacin deficiency 
 Folate deficiency 
o Vitamin toxicity 
 Vitamin C 
 Niacin, vitamin B3 
o Ingestion of heavy metals or toxins (eg, copper, tin, zinc) 
o Ingestion of plants (eg, hyacinths, daffodils, azale a, mistletoe, Amanita species 
 Signs and symptoms 
Acute diarrhea is defined as the abrupt onset of 3 or more loose stools per day and lasts no longer than 
14 days; chronic or persistent diarrhea is defined as an episode that lasts longer th an 14 days. 
The clinical presentation and course of diarrhea therefore depend on its cause and on the host. Consider 
the following to determine the source/cause of the patient’s diarrhea: 
 Stool characteristics (eg, consistency, color, volume, frequency) 
 Presence of associated enteric symptoms (eg, nausea/vomiting, fever, abdominal pain) 
 Use of child daycare (common pathogens: rotavirus, astrovirus, calicivirus; Campylobacter , 
Shigella , Giardia , and Cryptosporidium species [spp]) 
 Food ingestion history ( eg, raw/contaminated foods, food poisoning) 
 Water exposure (eg, swimming pools, marine environment) 
 Camping history (possible exposure to contaminated water sources) 
 Travel history (common pathogens affect specific regions; also consider rotavirus and Shigella, 
Salmonella, and Campylobacter spp regardless of specific travel history, as these organisms are 
prevalent worldwide) 
 Animal exposure (eg, young dogs/cats: Campylobacter spp; turtles: Salmonella spp) 
 Predisposing conditions (eg, hospitalization, antibiotic use, immunocompromised state) 
Signs and symptoms of diarrhea may include the following: 
 Dehydration: Lethargy, depressed consciousness, sunken anterior fontanel, dry mucous 
membranes, sunken eyes, lack of tears, poor skin turgor, delayed capill ary refill 
 Failure to thrive and malnutrition: Reduced muscle/fat mass or peripheral edema 
 Abdominal pain/cramping 
 Borborygmi 
 Perianal erythema 
 Organisms and Frequency of Symptoms 
Organism Incubation Duration Vomiting Fever Abdominal 
Rotavirus 1-7 d 4-8 d Yes Low No 
Adenovirus 8-10 d 5-12 d Delayed Low No 
Norovirus 1-2 d 2 d Yes No No 
Astrovirus 1-2 d 4-8 d +/- +/- No 
Calicivirus 1-4 d 4-8 d Yes +/- No 
Aeromonas species None 0-2 wk +/- +/- No 
Campylobacter 
species 2-4 d 5-7 d No Yes Yes 
C difficile Variable Variable No Few Few 
C perfringens Minimal 1 d Mild No Yes 
Enterohemorrhagic E 
coli 1-8 d 3-6 d No +/- Yes 
Enterotoxigenic E coli 1-3 d 3-5 d Yes Low Yes 
Plesiomonas species None 0-2 wk +/- +/- +/- 
Salmonella species 0-3 d 2-7 d Yes Yes Yes 
Shigella species 0-2 d 2-5 d No High Yes 
Vibrio species 0-1 d 5-7 d Yes No Yes 
Y enterocolitica None 1-46 d Yes Yes Yes 
Giardia species 2 wk 1+ wk No No Yes 
Cryptosporidium 
species 5-21 d Months No Low Yes 
Entamoeba species 5-7 d 1-2+ wk No Yes No 
 Food history can be helpful. 
o Ingestion of raw or contaminated food is a common cause of infectious diarrhea. 
o Organisms that cause food poisoning include the following: 
 Dairy food -Campylobacter and Salmonella species 
 Eggs -Salmonella species 
 Meats -C perfringens and Aeromonas, Campylobacter , and Salmonella species 
 Ground beef - Enterohemorrhagic E coli 
 Poultry -Campylobacter species 
 Pork -C perfringens, Y enterocolitica 
 Seafood - Astrovirus and Aeromonas, Plesiomonas, and Vibrio species 
 Oysters - Calicivirus and Plesiomonas and Vibrio species 
 Vegetables -Aeromonas species and C perfringens 
Water exposure can contribute to diarrhea. 
o Water is a major reservoir for many organisms that cause diarrhea. 
o Swimming pools have been associated with outbreaks of infection with Shigella species; 
Aeromonas organisms are associated with exposure to the marine environment. 
o Giardia, Cryptosporidium, and Entamoeba organisms are resistant to water chlorination; 
therefore, exposure to contaminated water shoul d raise index of suspicion for these 
parasites. 
A history of camping suggests exposure to water sources contaminated with Giardia organisms. 
Animal exposure can contribute to diarrhea. 
o Exposure to young dogs or cats is associated with Campylobacter organis ms. 
Dehydration Severity, Signs, and Symptoms 
Hydration 0-5% Dehydration 
 5-10% Dehydration 
(Moderate) 
 10% or More 
General Well Restless Lethargic 
Eyes Normal Sunken Very sunken 
Tears Present Absent Absent 
Mouth Moist Dry Very dry 
Thirst Drinks normally Thirsty Drinks poorly 
Skin Pinch retracts immediately Pinch retracts slowly Pinch stays folded 
Fecal laboratory studies include the following: 
 Examination for ova and parasites 
 Leukocyte count 
 pH level: A pH level of 5.5 or less or the presence of reducing substances indicates carbohydrate 
intolerance, which is usually secondary to viral illness 
 Examination of exudates for presence/absence of leukocytes 
 Cultures: Always culture for Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter spp and Y enterocolitica in 
the presence of clinical signs of colitis or if fecal leukocytes are present; look for Clostridium 
difficile in those with diarrhea characterized by colitis and/or bloody stools; assess for 
Escherichia coli , particularly O157:H7, with bloody diarrhea and a history of eating ground beef; 
screen for Vibrio and Plesiomonas spp with a history of eating raw seafood or foreign travel 
 Enzyme immunoassay for rotavirus or adenovirus antigens 
 Latex agglutination assay f or rotavirus 
Management 
Acute -onset diarrhea is usually self -limited; however, an acute infection can have a protracted course. 
Management is generally supportive: In most cases, the best option for treatment of acute -onset 
diarrhea is the early use of OR T. 
Children with diarrhea may benefit from green tea and pomegranate extract. 
Strains of probiotics (defined as live microorganisms that when ingested in adequate doses, provide a 
benefit to the host) have been found to be effective as an adjunct when tre ating children with acute 
Indications for medical evaluation of children with acute diarrhea include the following: 
 Younger than 3 months 
 Weight of less than 8 kg 
 History of premature birth, chronic medical conditions, or concurrent illness 
 Fever of 38ºC or higher in infants younger than 3 months or 39ºC or higher in children aged 3 -36 
 Visible blood in the stool 
 High -output diarrhea 
 Persistent emesis 
 Signs of dehydration as reported by caregiver, including sunken eyes, decreased tear s, dry 
mucous membranes, and decreased urine output 
 Mental status changes 
 Inadequate responses to ORT or caregiver unable to administer ORT 
 General principles: 
1. Prevent or treat dehydration: rehydration consists of prompt replacement of fluid and 
electrolyte losses as required, until the diarrhea stops. 
2. Administer zinc sulfate to children under 5 years. 
Children under 6 months : 10 mg once daily (1/2 tablet once daily) for 10 days 
Children from 6 months to 5 years : 20 mg once daily (1 tablet once daily ) for 10 days 
Place the half -tablet or full tablet in a teaspoon, add a bit of water to dissolve it, and 
give the entire spoonful to the child. Do not administer this treatment if the child receives 
ready -to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) which already contai ns zinc. 
3. Prevent malnutrition. 
4. Do not systematically administer antimicrobials: only certain diarrheas require antibiotics (see 
antimicrobial treatment , following page). 
5. Do not administer anti -diarrheal drugs or antiemetics. 
6. Treat the underlying condition if any (malaria, otitis, respiratory infection, etc.). 
Treatment of dehydration due to diarrhea includes the following: 
Minimal or no dehydration 
o Rehydration therapy - Not applicable 
o Replacement of losses 
 Less than 10 kg body weight - 60-120 mL oral rehy dration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
 More than 10 kg body weight - 120-140 mL oral rehydration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
Mild -to-moderate dehydration 
o Rehydration therapy - Oral rehydration solution (50 -100 mL/kg over 3 -4 h) 
o Replacement of losses 
 Less than 10 kg body weight - 60-120 mL oral rehydration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
 More than 10 kg body weight - 120-140 mL oral rehydration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
Severe dehydration (at hospital level) 
o Rehydration therapy - Intravenous lactated Ringer solution or normal saline (20 
mL/kg until perfusion and mental status improve), followed by 100 mL/kg oral 
rehydration solution over 4 hours or 5% dextrose (ha lf normal saline) intravenously at 
twice maintenance fluid rates 
o Replacement of losses 
 Less than 10 kg body weight - 60-120 mL oral rehydration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
 More than 10 kg body weight - 120-140 mL oral rehydration solution for each 
diarrhea stool or vomiting episode 
 If unable to drink, administer through nasogastric tube or intravenously 
administer 5% dextrose (one fourth normal saline) with 20 mEq/L potassium 
Not all commercial ORT formulas promote optimal absorption of electrolytes, water, and nutrients. The 
ideal solution has a low osmolarity (210 -250) and a sodium content of 50 -60 mmol/L. 
 Pharmacotherapy 
Vaccines (eg, rotavirus) can help increase resistance to infection. Antimicrobial and antiparasitic a gents 
may be used to treat diarrhea caused by specific organisms and/or clinical circumstances. Such 
medications include the following: 
 Cefixime 
 Ceftriaxone 
 Cefotaxime 
 Erythromycin 
 Furazolidone 
 Iodoquinol 
 Metronidazole 
 Vancomycin 
 Rifaximin 
Therap ies recommended for some nonviral diarrheas include the following: 
 Aeromonas species: Use cefixime and most third -generation and fourth -generation 
cephalosporins. 
 Campylobacter species: Erythromycin shortens illness duration and shedding. 
 C difficile: Discontinue potential causative antibiotics. If antibiotics cannot be stopped or this 
does not result in resolution, use oral metronidazole or vancomycin. Vancomycin is reserved for 
the child who is seriously ill. 
 C perfringens: Do not treat with antibiotic s. 
 Cryptosporidium parvum: Administer paromomycin; however, effectiveness is not proven. 
Nitazoxanide, a newer anthelmintic, is effective against C parvum . 
 Entamoeba histolytica: Metronidazole followed by iodoquinol or paromomycin is administered 
in symp tomatic patients. Asymptomatic carriers in nonendemic areas should receive iodoquinol 
or paromomycin. 
 E coli: Trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole (TMP -SMX) should be administered if moderate or 
severe diarrhea is noted; antibiotic treatment may increase likelih ood of hemolytic -uremic 
syndrome (HUS). Parenteral second -generation or third -generation cephalosporin is indicated 
for systemic complications. 
 G lamblia: Metronidazole or nitazoxanide can be used. 
 Plesiomonas species: Use TMP -SMX or any cephalosporin. 
 Salmonella species: Treatment prolongs carrier state, is associated with relapse, and is not 
indicated for nontyphoid -uncomplicated diarrhea. Treat infants younger than 3 months and 
high -risk patients (eg, immunocompromised, sickle cell disease). TMP -SMX i s first -line 
medication; however, resistance occurs. Use ceftriaxone and cefotaxime for invasive disease. 
 Shigella species: Treatment shortens illness duration and shedding but does not prevent 
complications. TMP -SMX is first -line medication; however, res istance occurs. Cefixime, 
ceftriaxone, and cefotaxime are recommended for invasive disease. 
 V cholerae: Treat infected individuals and contacts. Doxycycline is the first -line antibiotic, and 
erythromycin is second -line antibiotic. 
 Yersinia species: TMP -SMX, cefixime, ceftriaxone, and cefotaxime are used. Treatment does not 
shorten disease duration; reserve for complicated cases. 
 GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE 
Gastroesophageal reflux disease occurs when the amount of gastric juice that refluxes into the 
esophagus exceeds the normal limit, causing symptoms with or without associated esophageal mucosal 
Signs and symptoms 
Typical esophageal symptoms include the following: 
 Heartburn 
 Regurgitation 
 Dysphagia 
Abnormal reflux can cause atypi cal (extraesophageal) symptoms, such as the following: 
 Coughing and/or wheezing 
 Hoarseness, sore throat 
 Otitis media 
 Non cardiac chest pain 
 Enamel erosion or other dental manifestations 
A history of nausea, vomiting, or regurgitation should alert the physician to evaluate for delayed gastric 
Management 
Treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease involves a stepwise approach. The goals are to control 
symptoms, to heal esophagitis, and to prevent recurrent esophagitis or other complications. The 
treatment is based on lifestyle modification and control of gastric acid secretion through medical 
therapy with antacids or proton pump inhibitors or surgical treatment with corrective antireflux surgery. 
Nonpharmacotherapy 
Lifestyle modifications us ed in the management of gastroesophageal reflux disease include the 
following: 
 Losing weight (if overweight) 
 Avoiding alcohol, chocolate, citrus juice, and tomato -based products 
 Avoiding peppermint, coffee, and possibly the onion family 
 Eating small, fre quent meals rather than large meals 
 Waiting 3 hours after a meal to lie down 
 Refraining from ingesting food (except liquids) within 3 hours of bedtime 
 Avoiding bending or stooping positions 
Pharmacotherapy 
The following medications are used in the man agement of gastroesophageal reflux disease: 
 H2 receptor antagonists (eg, ranitidine, cimetidine, famotidine, nizatidine) 
 Proton pump inhibitors (eg, omeprazole, pantoprazole) 
 Prokinetic agents (eg, aluminum hydroxide) 
 Antacids (eg, aluminum hydroxide, m agnesium hydroxide) 
Antacids were the standard treatment and are still effective in controlling mild symptoms of GERD. 
Antacids should be taken after each meal and at bedtime. 
Aluminum hydroxide PO: 1.5 to 3 g/day in 3 divided doses one hour aft er meals or instruct the patient 
to take 500 mg at the time of a painful attack. 
H2 receptor antagonists and H2 blocker therapy 
 H2 receptor antagonists are the first -line agents for patients with mild to moderate symptoms and 
grades I -II esophagitis. Opti ons include ranitidine (Zantac) 150 mg PO q12hr 
Proton pump inhibitors 
PPIs are the most powerful medications available for treating GERD. These agents should be used only 
when this condition has been objectively documented. 
Omeprazole 20 mg PO qDay for 4 weeks 
 PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE 
Gastric and duodenal ulcers usually cannot be differentiated based on history alone, although some 
findings may be suggestive. Epigastric pain is the most common symptom of both ga stric and duodenal 
ulcers. It is characterized by a gnawing or burning sensation and occurs after meals —classically, shortly 
after meals with gastric ulcer and 2 -3 hours afterward with duodenal ulcer. 
Possible manifestations include the following: 
 Dyspeps ia, including belching, bloating, distention, and fatty food intolerance 
 Heartburn 
 Chest discomfort 
 Hematemesis or melena resulting from gastrointestinal bleeding. Melena may be intermittent 
over several days or multiple episodes in a single day. 
 Rarel y, a briskly bleeding ulcer can present as hematochezia. 
 Symptoms consistent with anemia (eg, fatigue, dyspnea) may be present 
 Sudden onset of symptoms may indicate perforation. 
 NSAID -induced gastritis or ulcers may be silent, especially in elderly pati ents. 
 Only 20 -25% of patients with symptoms suggestive of peptic ulceration are found on 
investigation to have a peptic ulcer. 
Alarm features that warrant prompt gastroenterology referral include the following: 
 Bleeding or anemia 
 Early satiety 
 Unexpla ined weight loss 
 Progressive dysphagia or odynophagia 
 Recurrent vomiting 
 Family history of GI cancer 
Clinical findings are few and nonspecific and include the following: 
 Epigastric tenderness (usually mild) 
 Right upper quadrant tenderness may suggest a biliary etiology or, less frequently, PUD. 
 Guaiac -positive stool resulting from occult blood loss 
 Melena resulting from acute or subacute gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Succussion splash resulting from partial or complete gastric outlet obstruction 
Trea tment of non -complicated ulcers 
For an isolated episode: 
Identify patients taking NSAID or acetylsalicylic acid; stop treatment; 
Encourage patients to avoid alcohol and tobacco use; 
Omeprazole : 40 mg PO qDay for 4 -8 weeks 
Duodenal Ulcer 
Omeprazole : 20 mg PO qDay for 4 -8 weeks 
A special diet is not indicated for patients with duodenal ulcers. It is a common -sense approach to avoid 
any food or beverages that may aggravate symptoms. 
Surgical consultation is recommended for all patients with bleeding ulcers, especially those patients who 
are at high risk of significant bleeding. Such ulcers include those that have caused hemodynamic 
instability, those that are actively bleeding. 
 PEDIATRIC APHTHOUS ULCERS 
Categorized as an idiopathic disease, aphthous ulce rs are frequently misdiagnosed, treated incorrectly, 
or simply ignored. 
The 3 categories of recurrent aphthous ulcers (canker sores) are as follows: 
 Minor aphthous ulcers (80 -85% of recurrent aphthous ulcers [canker sores]) are 1 -10 mm in 
diameter and hea l spontaneously in 7 -10 days. 
 Major aphthous ulcers (also called Sutton disease) constitute 10 -15% of recurrent aphthous 
ulcers (canker sores). These lesions are greater than 10 mm in diameter, take 10 -30 days or 
more to heal, and may leave scars. 
 Herpet iform ulcers (5 -10% of recurrent aphthous ulcers [canker sores]) are multiple, clustered, 
1-mm to 3 -mm lesions that may coalesce into plaques. These usually heal in 7 -10 days. 
Patients typically describe a prodromal stage of a burning or pricking sensati on of the oral mucosa 1 -2 
days before the ulcer appears. 
Treatment & Management 
The primary goals of medical therapy in patients with aphthous ulcers (canker sores) are pain relief, 
maintenance of fluid and nutrition intake, early resolution, and prevent ion of recurrence. Most patients 
with minor or herpetiform aphthae should be treated empirically before extensive and costly studies are 
initiated. Treatment of recurrent aphthous ulcers (canker sores) typically includes anti -inflammatory 
and/or symptomati c therapy, whereas immunomodulators are rarely used, except in severe, refractory 
Lidocaine (Xylocaine) 
Available as gel or viscous PO solution. Does not shorten healing time but may help patient to tolerate 
eating and drinking. Pain relief may be short, and frequent applications may be necessary. 
Diphenhydramine elixir (Benadryl) 
First -line antihistamine for topical treatment of localized skin and mucus -membrane irritation. May be 
applied directly to ulcerated submucosal tissue. Relieves PO pain in some patients. 
 CONSTIPATION 
Constipation is the most common digestive complaint. It is a symptom rather than a disease. Despite its 
frequency, it often remains unrecognized until the patient develops sequelae, such as anorectal 
disorders or diverticular disease. 
Signs and symptoms 
According to the Rome III criteria for constipation, a patient must have experienced at least 2 of the 
following symptoms over the preceding 3 months: 
 Fewer than 3 bowel movements per week 
 Straining 
 Lumpy or hard stools 
 Sensation of anorectal obstruction 
 Sensation of incom plete defecation 
 Manual maneuvering required to defecate 
A constipated patient may be otherwise totally asymptomatic or may complain of 1 or more of the 
following: 
 Abdominal bloating 
 Pain on defecation 
 Rectal bleeding 
 Spurious diarrhea 
 Low back pain 
Management 
Initial treatment measures for constipation include manual disimpaction and transrectal enemas. 
Medical care should focus on dietary change and exercise rather than laxatives, enemas, and 
suppositories, none of which really address the underly ing problem. 
The key to treating most patients with constipation is correction of dietary deficiencies, which generally 
involves increasing intake of fiber and fluid and decreasing the use of constipating agents (eg, milk 
products, coffee, tea, alcohol). 
 Bulk -forming agents (fibers; eg, psyllium): arguably the best and least expensive medication for 
long -term treatment 
 Rapidly acting lubricants (eg, mineral oil): Used for acute or subacute management of 
constipation 
 Prokinetics (eg, tegaserod): Proposed f or use with severe constipation -predominant symptoms 
 Stimulant laxatives (eg, senna): Over -the-counter agents commonly but inappropriately used for 
long -term treatment of constipation 
 PEDIATRIC CONSTIPATION 
For practical clinical purposes, constipation is generally defined as infrequent defecation, painful 
defecation, or both. In most cases, parents are worried that their child's stools are too large, too hard, 
not frequent enough, and/or painful to pass. 
The Paris Consensus on Childhood Con stipation Terminology (PACCT) defines constipation as "a period 
of 8 weeks with at least 2 of the following symptoms: defecation frequency less than 3 times per week, 
fecal incontinence frequency greater than once per week, passage of large stools that clo g the toilet, 
palpable abdominal or rectal fecal mass, stool withholding behavior, or painful defecation. 
Clinical Presentation 
In young infants, functional constipation often develops at the time of a dietary transition (eg, from 
breast milk to formula, the addition of solid foods into the diet, from formula to whole milk). 
In toddlers, functional constipation often develops near the time of toilet training. In toddlers and young 
children, constipation may develop following an illness a ssociated with either a severe diaper dermatitis 
or dehydration. 
Treatment & Management 
Although constipation is an extremely common problem among children, few studies have 
systematically evaluated different management strategies. 
Dietary changes, such as increasing the child's intake of fluids and carbohydrates, are commonly 
recommended as part of the treatment of constipation. 
Complex carbohydrates and unabsorbable sugars (eg, sorbitol) are found in many fruit juices (eg, prune, 
pear, apple). These ca rbohydrates increase stool frequency by increasing fecal water content. 
In infants and young children, it is appropriate to consider removing cow -milk protein from the diet for a 
period is appropriate, because chronic constipation may be precipitated by in gestion of cow -milk 
In several randomized trials, laxatives have been shown to be beneficial in the treatment of chronic 
childhood constipation. Studies have also shown that polyethylene glycol, mineral oil, magnesium 
hydroxide, and lactulose ar e effective and can be used for prolonged time periods without risk. 
 Polyethylene glycol (Dulcolax Balance) 
<6 months: Safety and efficacy not establish ed 
≥6 months: 0.5 -1.5 g/kg PO once daily for no longer than 2 weeks; adjusted to effect; not to exceed 17 
Magnesium hydroxide (OTC)Milk of Magnesia 
<2 years: Safety and efficacy not established 
Suspension 
 2-6 years: 5 -15 mL/day of regular -strength l iquid PO at bedtime or in divided doses 
 6-12 years: 15 -30 mL/day (400 mg/5 mL) or 7.5 -15 mL/day (800 mg/5 mL) PO at bedtime or in 
divided doses 
 ≥12 years: 30 -60 mL/day (400 mg/5 mL) or 15 -30 mL/day (800 mg/5 mL) PO at bedtime or in 
divided doses 
Bisacodyl (OTC)Dulcolax 
<6 years: PO administration not recommended, because of requirement to swallow tablets 
6-12 years: 5 mg or 0.3 mg/kg PO at bedtime or before breakfast 
>12 years: 5 -15 mg PO at bedtime 
DERMATOLOGY 
 Dermatological examina tion 
Observe the type of lesion: 
Macule: A flat, colored lesion, <2 cm in diameter, not raised above the surface of the surrounding skin. A 
"freckle," or ephelid, is a prototype pigmented macule. 
Patch: A large (>2 cm) flat lesion with a color different from the surrounding skin. This differs from a 
macule only in size. 
Papule: A small, solid lesion, <0.5 cm in diameter, raised above the surface of the surrounding skin and, 
hence, palpable (e.g., a closed comedone, or whitehead, in acne). 
Nodule: A lar ger (0.5 –5.0 cm), firm lesion raised above the surface of the surrounding skin. This differs 
from a papule only in size (e.g., a dermal nevomelanocytic nevus). 
Tumor: A solid, raised growth >5 cm in diameter. 
Plaque: A large (>1 cm), flat -topped, raise d lesion; edges may either be distinct (e.g., in psoriasis) or 
gradually blend with surrounding skin (e.g., in eczematous dermatitis). 
Vesicle: A small, fluid -filled lesion, <0.5 cm in diameter, raised above the plane of surrounding skin. Fluid 
is often visible, and the lesions are translucent [e.g., vesicles in allergic contact dermatitis caused by 
Toxicodendron (poison ivy)]. 
Pustule: A vesicle filled with leukocytes. Note: The presence of pustules does not necessarily signify the 
existence of an infec tion. 
Bulla: A fluid -filled, raised, often translucent lesion >0.5 cm in diameter. 
Wheal: A raised, erythematous, edematous papule or plaque, usually representing short -lived 
vasodilatation and vasopermeability. 
Telangiectasia: A dilated, superficia l blood vessel. 
Look at the distribution of the lesions over the body; observe their arrangement: isolated, clustered, 
linear, annular (in a ring). Ask if the lesions are itchy. 
Look for a possible cause: insect bites; scabies, lice, other parasitic sk in infections; contact with plants, 
animals, jewellery, detergents, etc. 
Ask about any ongoing treatment: topical, oral or parenteral. 
Look for local or regional signs (secondary infection, lymphangitis, adenopathy, erysipelas) and/or 
systemic signs (fev er, septicemia, distant infectious focus). 
Consider the sanitary condition of the family, particularly for contagious skin diseases (scabies, scalp 
ringworm, lice). 
Check tetanus vaccination status. 
Patients with skin disease often present late. At this stage, primary lesions and specific signs may be 
masked by secondary infection. In these cases, it is necessary to reexamine the patient, after treating 
the secondary infection, in order to identify and treat the underlying skin disease. 
Human scabies is an intensely pruritic skin infestation caused by the host -specific mite Sarcoptes scabiei 
This mite can travel from the infected person to another person. Most people get scabies from direct, 
skin-to-skin contact. Less often, people pick up mites from infested items such as bedding, clothes, and 
furniture. The mite can survive for about 48 to 72 hours without human contact. 
Signs and symptoms 
Burrows are a pathognomonic sign and represent the intraepi dermal tunnel created by the moving 
female mite. They appear as serpiginous, grayish, threadlike elevations in the superficial epidermis, 
ranging from 2 -10 mm long. 
Scabies can develop anywhere on the skin. The mites, howe ver, prefer to burrow in certain parts of the 
High -yield locations for burrows include the following: 
 Webbed spaces of the fingers 
 Flexor surfaces of the wrists 
 Belt line 
 Scrotum (men) 
 Areolae (women) 
Scabies in children 
 Some children develop widespread scabies. The scabies rash can cover most of the body. Even a child’s 
palms, soles, and scalp can be infested with mites. In babies, the rash often appears on the palms and 
soles. Babies who have scabies are very irritable an d often do not want to eat or sleep. Children, too, are 
often very irritable. The itch can keep them awake at night. 
In geriatric patients, scabies demonstrates a propensity for the back, often appearing as excoriations. In 
infants and small children, bur rows are commo nly located on the palms and soles. 
One- to 3-mm erythematous papules and vesicles are seen in typical distributions in adults. The vesicles 
are discrete lesions filled with clear fluid, although the fluid may appear cloudy if the vesicle is more 
than a few days old. 
Nodular scabies 
Nodules occur in 7 -10% of patients with scabies, particularly young children. In neonates unable to 
scratch, pinkish brown nodules ranging in size from 2 -20 mm in diameter may develop. 
Crusted scabies 
In crusted scabies, lesions are often hyperkeratotic and crusted and cover large areas. Marked scaling is 
common, and pruritus may be minimal or absent. Nail dystrophy and scalp lesions may be prominent. 
The hands and arms are the usual locations for lesions, but al l sites are vulnerable. 
Secondary lesions 
These lesions result from scratching, secondary infection, and/or the host’s immune response against 
the scabies mites and their products. Characteristic findings include the following : 
 Excoriations 
 Widespread eczematous dermatitis 
 Honey -colored crusting 
 Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation 
 Erythroderma 
 Prurigo nodules 
 Frank pyoderma 
The diagnosis of scabies can often be made clinically in patients with a pruritic rash and characteristic 
linear burrows. 
Management 
Who needs treatment? 
The person diagnosed with scabies and everyone who has had close contact with that person need 
treatment. Even people who do not have any signs or sympto ms must be treated. This is the only way to 
prevent new outbreaks of scabies weeks later. People who should be treated include: 
 Everyone who lives with the person. 
 Recent sexual partners. 
Most people can be cured with a medicine that they apply to their skin. These medicines are often 
applied to all skin from the neck down. Infants and young children often need treatment for their scalp 
and face, too. 
Most medicine is applied at bedtime. The medicine is then washed off when the patient wakes up. You 
may need to repeat this process one week later. 
Scabies treatment includes administration of a scabicidal agent (eg, permethrin, lindane, or ivermectin), 
as well as an appropriate antimicrobial agent if a secondary infection has developed. 5% permethrin 
cream : This is the most common treatment for scabies. It is safe for children as young as 1 month old 
and women who are pregnant. 
 Pruritus may be partially alleviated with an oral antihistamine, such as hydroxyzine hydrochloride 
(Atarax), diphenhydramine hydro chloride (Benadryl), or cyproheptadine hydrochloride (Periactin). In 
rare cases, prednisone may be used to treat severe pruritus. 
Because of their heavy mite burden, patients with crusted scabies may require repeated applications of 
topical scabicides or t reatment that simultaneously uses oral ivermectin and a topical agent, such as 
permethrin. 
The preferred treatment is 5% permethrin (lotion or cream): 
Child > 2 months and adult: one application, with a contact time of 8 hours, then rinse off. Permethrin is 
easier to use (no dilution required), and preferred over benzyl benzoate in children, and 
pregnant/lactating women. One application may be sufficient, but a second application 7 days later 
reduces the risk of treatment failure. 
or, if not available, benzyl benzoate 25% lotion: 
A second application of benzyl benzoate (e.g. after 24 hours, with a rinse between the 2 applications; or 
two successive applications, 10 minutes apart, when the first application has dried, with a rinse after 24 
hours) reduces th e risk of treatment failure. 
Second applications are not recommended in pregnant women and children < 2 years. 
For infants: Use mixed with three parts of water, just one time 
For older children: Use mixed with an equal quantity of water, just one time. 
RED FLAG - Caution 
If you get treatment and people with whom you live or have close contact do not get treatment, you can 
get the mites again. People do not have to have signs and symptoms of scabies to have mites on their 
skin. Someone who has never had sc abies may not have any symptoms for 2 to 6 weeks. 
You should then massage the medicine onto clean, dry skin. The medicine must remain on the skin for 8 
to 14 hours. You will then wash off the medicine. For this reason, most people apply the medicine at 
bedtime and wash it off in the morning. 
Apply the medicine from your neck to your toes . This includes all skin between your neck and toes — 
the skin around your nails, the crease between your buttocks, and the skin between your toes. Infants, 
children, and the elderly often need to treat their scalp, temples, and forehead. You should never apply 
medicine to the nose, lips, eyelids, nor around the eyes or mouth. 
If you wash your hands after applying the medicine, be sure to reapply the medicine to your hands . 
Mites like to burrow in the hands, so it is important to treat the hands. Be sure to apply the medicine to 
the skin between your fingers. 
The day you start treatment, wash your clothes, bedding, towels, and washcloths. Mites can survive 
for a few days w ithout human skin. If a mite survives, you can get scabies again. To prevent this, you 
must wash clothes, sheets, comforters, blankets, towels, and other items. Be sure to follow these 
instructions when washing: 
 Wash all items in a washing machine, using the hottest water possible. 
 After washing, dry everything in a dryer, using the hot setting. 
 If you cannot wash something in a washing machine and then dry it in a dryer, take it to a dry 
cleaner or seal it in plastic bag for at least 1 week. 
 Items that h ave not touched your skin for more than 1 week generally do not need washing. If 
you are not sure whether you wore clothing or used an item within the past week, be sure to 
wash and dry it. 
Urticaria, commonly referred to as hives, appears as raised, well -circumscribed areas of erythema and 
edema involving the dermis and epidermis that are very pruritic (see the image below). It may be acute 
(<6 wk) or chronic (>6 wk). 
For chronic or recurrent urticaria, important considerati ons include previous causative factors and the 
effectiveness of various treatments, as follows: 
 Precipitants, such as heat, cold, pressure, exercise, sunlight, emotional stress, or chronic medical 
conditions 
 Other medical conditions that can cause pruritu s (usually without rash), such as diabetes 
mellitus, chronic renal insufficiency, primary biliary cirrhosis, or other nonurticarial dermatologic 
 Family and personal medical history of angioedema - Characteristics of angioedema include 
vasodilati on and exudation of plasma into the deeper tissues more so than with simple urticaria; 
angioedema can occur with and without the wheals of simple urticaria and presents clinically as 
subcutaneous swelling that is generally nonpitting and nonpruritic. 
For acute urticaria, the main consideration involves possible precipitants, such as the following: 
 Recent illness 
 Medication use 
 IV radiocontrast media 
 New perfumes, hair dyes, detergents, lotions, creams, or clothes 
 Exposure to new pets (da nder), dust, mold, chemicals, or plants 
 Pregnancy (usually occurs in last trimester and typically resolves spontaneously soon after 
 Contact with nickel, rubber, latex, industrial chemicals, and nail polish 
 Sun or cold exposure 
 Exercise 
 Alcoh ol ingestion 
The physical examination should focus on conditions that might precipitate urticaria or could be 
potentially life -threatening and include the following: 
  Angioedema of the lips, tongue, or larynx 
 Individual urticarial lesions that are painfu l, long -lasting (>24 h), or ecchymotic or that leave 
residual hyperpigmentation or ecchymosis upon resolution are suggestive of urticarial vasculitis 
 Systemic signs or symptoms 
 Scleral icterus, hepatic enlargement, or tenderness 
 Thyromegaly 
 Pneumonia o r bronchospasm ( asthma ) 
 Cutaneous evidence of bacterial or fungal infection 
Acute urticaria may rarely progress to life -threatening angioedema or anaphylactic shock in a very short 
period, although anaphylactic shock is usually of rapid onset with no urticaria or angioedema. 
Prehospital measures may include the following when there is concern for anaphylactic shock: 
 If associated angioedema is present, IM epinephrine 
 If associated bronchospasm is present, nebulized albuterol 
 Other measures may be appropriate, such as continuous ECG, blood pressure and pulse 
oximetry monitoring; administering intravenous crystalloids if the patient is hypotensive; and 
administering oxygen. 
 Diphenhy dramine or hydroxyzine, if available 
Management of urticaria is focused on treating the symptoms and typically is not altered by underlying 
etiology. The mainstay is avoidance of further exposure to the antigen causing urticaria. 
Pharmacologic treatment options include the following: 
 Antihistamines, primarily those that block H1 receptors with low sedating activity, such as 
fexofenadine, loratadine, desloratadine, cetirizine, and levocetirizine are first -line therapy; 
 Glucocorticoids 
 Methotrexate, colc hicine, dapsone, indomethacin, and hydroxychloroquine (for urticarial 
vasculitis) 
 Patients with chronic or recurrent urticaria should be referred to a dermatologist for further 
evaluation and management. 
Louse infestation rem ains a major problem throughout the world, making the diagnosis and treatment 
of louse infestation a common task in general medical practice. Pediculosis capitis results in significant 
psychologi cal stress in children and adults and missed schooldays in children, particularly in areas with a 
no-nit policy. 
Lice are ectoparasites that live on the body. Lice feed on human blood after piercing the skin and 
injecting saliva, which may cause pruritus due to an allergic reaction. Lice crawl but cannot fly or hop. 
Causative organisms include P humanus capitis (head louse), P humanus corporis (body louse), and P 
pubis (pubic louse). 
Pediculos is capitis is spread by direct contact with an infected person. Head -to-head contact with an 
infested individual at school, at home, and while playing may result in head lice infestation; personal 
hygiene and environmental cleanliness are not risk factors. Fomites, such as clothing, headgear, hats, 
combs, hairbrushes, hair barrettes, may occasionally play a role in the spread of head lice. 
Risk factors for body lice infestation include close, crowded living situations (eg, crowded buses and 
trains, prison camps) and infrequent washing and/or changing of clothing. P corporis can be acquired via 
bedding, towels, or clothing recently used by an individual infested with lice; thus, individuals who are 
homeless, who are impoverished, or who are living in refugee camps are at high risk for infestation. 
Intimate or sexual contact with an individual who is infested with pubic lice is a common risk factor for 
pubic lice infestation. Risk factors for infestation of the pubic louse include sexual promiscuity and 
crowd ed living conditions. Contact with clothing, bedding, and towels used by an infested individual may 
occasionally be the cause of infestation. It is a myth that pubic lice are spread by sitting on a toilet seat; 
pubic lice’s feet are not designed to walk o n smooth surfaces such a toilet seats, and the lice cannot live 
for long away from a warm human body. 
Pruritus is the most common symptom of infestation. Children often have trouble sleeping because of 
intense pruritus at night. Areas affected in head lou se infestation include the scalp, the back of the neck, 
and postauricular areas. Scratching can cause secondary infection with bacterial sores. However, lice 
infestation may be asymptomatic, particularly if it is the first infestation and if the infestatio n is light. 
Patients infested with P corporis experience nocturnal pruritus, particularly in the axillary, truncal, and 
groin regions, when the lice move from the clothing to the body to feed. The investigating physician 
should inquire about the patient's socioeconomic status and living conditions, as body louse infestation 
generally affects people of low socioeconomic status. 
Adults infested with P pubis are usually sexually active and have groin and body hair involvement. 
Involvement with pruritus of the groin, axillae, eyelashes, or eyebrows can help differentiate P pubis 
infestation from head or body louse infestation. Parents of children infested with P pubis on the eyelids 
and/or eyebrows should be questioned about also being infested because the pare nts are usually the 
source of infestation. 
Treatment & Management 
Treatment of pediculosis has 2 aspects: medication and environmental control measures. Increasing 
emphasis is being placed on understanding the life cycle of lice in order to provide effec tive treatment. 
Not all treatment preparations are ovicidal. For weakly ovicidal or non -ovicidal pediculicides, routine 
retreatment is recommended typically 7 -9 days after the first treatment. For strongly ovicidal 
pediculicides, retreatment is recommended only if live (ie, crawling) lice are still present after 
treatment. Retreatment should ideally occur after all eggs have hatched but before new eggs are 
produced. It is extremely important to use medications as directed to ensure total eradication of the lice 
 through their life cycle. In addition, all infested persons in a household and their infested close contacts 
and bedmates should be treated at the same time. 
Head lice have been found on hats, scarves, brushes, combs, hair accessories, linens, towels, and stuffed 
animals. Since exposure to these fomites could result in infestation, it is recommended that such items 
used by the infe sted person within 2 days prior to pediculicide treatment be machine washed with hot 
water and dried with hot air since the lice and eggs are killed after 5 minutes of exposure to 
temperatures greater than 53.5°C. Items that cannot be laundered can be dry -cleaned or sealed in a 
plastic bag for 2 weeks. The floors and furniture should be vacuumed in order to remove hairs from an 
infested individual, which might have been shed with viable nits attached. 
In the treatment of body lice, medications are less e ssential than environmental measures. Patients with 
body lice should have infested clothing, bedding, and towels laundered with hot water (at least 55°C) 
and then dried in a dryer using a hot setting. For items that cannot be washed in a washing machine, the 
CDC recommends dry -cleaning or sealing and storing for 2 weeks in a plastic bag. If the patient maintains 
hygiene with regular appr opriate laundering of clothing, changes into clean clothing at least weekly, and 
avoids the sharing of clothing, beds, bedding, and towels used by other infested individuals, 
pediculicides are generally not required. If hygiene cannot be maintained, treatm ent with a pediculicide 
used to treat head lice may be necessary. Fumigation or dusting with chemical insecticides is 
occasionally needed to control and prevent spread of louse -bourne infections. 
Lotions are likely to be more effective e than shampoos, an d should be applied to all body hair including 
the beard and moustache if necessary 
A second application after 3 -7 days is advised 
Recommended regimens 
Permethrin 1% cream rinse. Apply to damp hair and wash out after 10 minutes. Permethrin is the drug 
of choice recommended by most authorities as the first line of treatment in head, pubic, and severe 
body louse infestation, especially for infants older than 2 months and small children. (Permethrin is safe 
during pregnancy and breastfeeding) 
 HERPES ZOSTER 
Reactivation of varicella -zoster virus (VZV) that has remained dormant within dorsal root ganglia, often 
for decades after the patient’s initial exposure to the virus in the form of varicella (chickenpox), results 
in herpes zoster . Although it is usually a self -limited dermatomal rash with pain, herpes zoster can be far 
more serious; in addition, acute cases often lead to postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). 
Signs and symptoms 
The clinical manifestations of herpes zost er can be divided into the following 3 phases: 
 Preeruptive phase (preherpetic neuralgia) 
 Acute eruptive phase 
 Chronic phase (PHN) 
The preeruptive phase is characterized by the following: 
 Sensory phenomena along 1 or more skin dermatomes, lasting 1 -10 da ys (average, 48 hours) 
 Phenomena usually are noted as pain or, less commonly, itching or paresthesias 
 Pain may simulate headache, iritis, pleurisy, brachial neuritis, cardiac pain, appendicitis or other 
intra -abdominal disease, or sciatica 
 Other symptom s, such as malaise, myalgia, headache, photophobia, and, uncommonly, fever 
The acute eruptive phase is marked by the following: 
 Patchy erythema, occasionally accompanied by induration, in the dermatomal area of 
involvement 
 Regional lymphadenopathy, eithe r at this stage or subsequently 
 Grouped herpetiform vesicles developing on the erythematous base (the classic finding) 
 Cutaneous findings that typically appear unilaterally, stopping abruptly at the midline of the 
limit of sensory coverage of the involve d dermatome 
 Vesicular involution: Vesicles initially are clear but eventually cloud, rupture, crust, and involute 
 After vesicular involution, slow resolution of the remaining erythematous plaques, typically 
without visible sequelae 
 Scarring can occur if deeper epidermal and dermal layers have been compromised by 
excoriation, secondary infection, or other complications 
 Almost all adults experience pain, typically severe 
 A few experience severe pain without a vesicular eruption (ie, zoster sine herpete) 
 Symptoms tend to resolve over 10 -15 days 
 Complete healing of lesions may require up to a month 
Diagnosis of herpes zoster is based primarily on the history and physical findings. In most cases, 
confirming the diagnosis via laboratory testing has no utility. In select patient populations, however —
particularly immunocompromised patients —the presentation of herpes zoster can be atypical and may 
require additional testing. 
Management 
Episodes of herpes zoster are generally self -limited and resolve without intervention; they tend to be 
more benign and mild in children than in adults. 
Conservative therapy includes the following: 
 Wet dressings with 5% aluminum acetate (Burrow solution), applied for 30 -60 minutes 4 -6 times 
 Lotions (eg, c alamine) 
Primary medications for acute zoster –associated pain include the following: 
 Narcotic and nonnarcotic analgesics (both systemic and topical) 
 Neuroactive agents (eg, tricyclic antidepressants [TCAs]) 
 Anticonvulsant agents 
Oral treatment with t he following has been found beneficial: 
 Acyclovir 
Usual Adult Dose for Herpes Zoster 
Acute herpes zoster : 
800 mg orally every 4 hours (5 times a day) for 7 to 10 days 
Hospital admission should be considered for patients with any of the following: 
 Severe symptoms 
 Immunosuppression 
 Atypical presentations (eg, myelitis) 
 Involvement of more than 2 dermatomes 
 Significant facial bacterial superinfection 
 Disseminated herpes zoster 
 Ophthalmic involvement 
 Meningoencephalopathic involvement 
 HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUSES 
Herpes simplex viruses are ubiquitous, host -adapted pathogens that cause a wide variety of disease 
states. Two types exist: herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV -1) and type 2 (HSV -2). Both are closely related 
but differ in epidemiology. HSV-1 is traditionally associated with orofacial disease, while HSV -2 is 
traditionally associated with genital disease; however, lesion location is not necessarily indicative of viral 
Acute herpetic gingivostomatitis 
This is a manifestation of prim ary HSV -1 infection that occurs in children aged 6 months to 5 years. 
Adults may also develop acute gingivostomatitis, but it is less severe and is associated more often with a 
posterior pharyngitis. 
Infected saliva from an adult or another child is the m ode of infection. The incubation period is 3 -6 days. 
Clinical features include the following: 
 Abrupt onset 
 High temperature ( 40oC) 
 Anorexia and listlessness 
 Gingivitis (This is the mo st striking feature, with markedly swollen, erythematous, friable gums.) 
 Vesicular lesions (These develop on the oral mucosa, tongue, and lips and later rupture and 
coalesce, leaving ulcerated plaques.) 
 Tender regional lymphadenopathy 
 Perioral skin invo lvement due to contamination with infected saliva 
Course: Acute herpetic gingivostomatitis lasts 5 -7 days, and the symptoms subside in 2 weeks. Viral 
shedding from the saliva may continue for 3 weeks or more. 
Acute herpetic pharyngotonsillitis 
In adults , oropharyngeal HSV -1 infection causes pharyngitis and tonsillitis more often than 
gingivostomatitis. 
Fever, malaise , headache, and sore throat are presenting features. 
The vesicles rupture to form ulcerative lesions with grayish exudates on the tonsils and the posterior 
Associated oral and labial lesions occur in fewer than 10% of patients. 
HSV-2 infection can cause similar symptoms and can be associated with orogenital contact or can occur 
concurrently with genital herpes. 
Herpes labialis 
This is the most common manifestation of recurrent HSV -1 infection. A prodrome of pain, burning, and 
tingling often occurs at the site, followed by the development of erythematous papules that rapidly 
develop into tiny, thin -walled, intraepidermal vesicles that become pustular and ulcerate. In most 
patients, fewer than two recurrences manifest each year, but some individuals experience monthly 
recurrences. 
Maximum viral shedding is in the first 24 hours of the acute illness but may last 5 days. 
Genital herpes 
The severity and frequency of the disease and the recurrence rate depend on numerous factors, 
including viral type, p rior immunity to autologous or heterologous virus, gender, and immune status of 
Treatment & Management 
Overall, medical treatment of herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is centered around specific antiviral 
treatment. While the same medication s are active against HSV -1 and HSV -2, the location of the lesions 
 and the chronicity (primary or reactivation) of the infection dictate the dosage and frequency of 
medication. It is important to note that life -threatening HSV infections in immunocompromise d patients 
and HSV encephalitis require high -dose intravenous acyclovir, often started empirically. 
Usual Adult Dose for Herpes Simplex - Mucocutaneous/Immunocompetent Host 
Initial episode or intermittent therapy: 200 mg orally every 4 hours (5 times a da y) for 10 days 
Recurrent episodes: 200 mg orally every 4 hours (5 times a day) for 5 days 
Usual Pediatric Dose for Herpes Simplex 
Neonatal HSV infection : 
Less than 3 months: 10 to 20 mg/kg or 500 mg/m2 IV every 8 hours for 10 to 21 days 
Usual Pediatric D ose for Herpes Simplex - Mucocutaneous/Immunocompetent Host 
3 months to 11 years : 
Initial episode: 10 to 20 mg/kg orally 4 times a day or 8 to 16 mg/kg orally 5 times a day for 7 to 10 days 
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends 40 to 80 mg/kg orally per day in 3 to 4 divided 
doses for 5 to 10 days. 
Maximum dose: 1 g per day 
12 years or older, over 40 kg : 
Initial episode, severe initial episode, and recurrent episodes: Adult dose 
 PEDIATRIC CHICKENPOX 
Varicella (chickenpox), is caused by the varicella -zoster virus. The disease is generally regarded as a mild, 
self-limiting viral illness with occasional complications. Varicella is common and highly contagious and 
affects nearly all susceptible children before adol escence. 
A significant number of varicella cases are associated with complications, among the most serious of 
which are varicella pneumonia and encephalitis. 
The following are the most c ommon presenting symptoms of varicella: 
 Low-grade fever preceding skin manifestations by 1 -2 days 
 Complaints of abdominal pain by some children 
 Pleomorphic rash, usually starting on the head and trunk and spreading to the rest of the body 
 Typically, com plaints of intense pruritus 
 Headache 
 Anorexia 
 Cough and coryza 
 Sore throat 
Children with eczema or dermatitis may have severe skin manifestations during varicella. 
Immunocompromised children often have severe and complicated varicella, and th eir mortality rate is 
higher than that in immunocompetent children. Such children are at high risk for developing progressive 
varicella with multiple organ involvement. These children may have prolonged high fever, prolonged 
extensive rashes, and hepatitis . 
Examination of rash 
The diagnosis of varicella is made upon observation of the characteristic chickenpox rash. This rash 
appears in crops. Skin lesions initially appear on the face and trunk, beginning as red macules and 
progressing over 12 -14 days to b ecome papular, vesicular, pustular, and finally crusted. New lesions 
continue to erupt for 3 -5 days. Lesions usually crust by 6 days (range 2 -12 d), and completely heal by 16 
days (range 7 -34 d). Prolonged eruption of new lesions or delayed crusting and he aling can occur with 
impaired cellular immunity. 
Fever is usually low grade (37,7oC) but may be as high as 41oC. In otherwise healthy children, fever 
typically subsides within 4 days. Prolonged fever should prompt suspicion of complicati on or 
immunodeficiency. Although tachypnea may be seen with fever alone, respiratory distress might 
represent pneumonitis. 
Complications 
 Perhaps the most serious complication of varicella is viral pneumonia, which primarily occurs in older 
childr en and adults. Respiratory symptoms usually appear 3 -4 days after the rash. The pneumonia may 
be unresponsive to antiviral therapy and may lead to death. 
Secondary bacterial infections 
Varicella may predispose patients to secondary bacterial infections. Signs and symptoms of such 
infections can be indistinguishable from uncomplicated varicella during the first 3 -4 days. Skin lesion 
infections are common and occur in 5 -10% of children. Suspect secondary infection if systemic 
manifestations do not improve i n 3-4 days, the fever returns or worsens, or the child’s condition 
deteriorates after initial improvement. Suspicion of secondary bacterial infection should prompt early 
institution of empirical antibiotic therapy until the results of culture studies becom e available. The most 
common infectious organisms are group A streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus. 
Neurological complications 
Acute postinfectious cerebellar ataxia is the most common neurological complication, with an incidence 
of 1 case per 4000 pati ents with varicella. Ataxia has sudden onset that usually occurs 2 -3 weeks after 
the onset of varicella. Manifestations may range from mild unsteadiness to complete inability to stand 
and walk, with accompanying incoordination and dysarthria. 
Hepatitis is a self -limited accompaniment of varicella. Severe hepatitis with clinical manifestations is 
infrequent in otherwise healthy children with varicella. Liver involvement is independent of the severity 
of skin and systemic manifestations. 
Treatment & Manage ment 
Treatment approaches include supportive measures, antiviral therapy, and management of secondary 
bacterial infection. 
Supportive Therapy 
Manage pruritus in patients with varicella with cool compresses and regular bathing. Discourage 
scratching to avo id scarring. Trimming the child’s fingernails and having the child wear mittens while 
sleeping may reduce scratching. 
Oral antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine, are used for severe pruritus. 
The routine use of acyclovir in healthy chil dren is recommended by the AAP if it can be given within 24 
hours after the rash first appears in children older than 12 years, those with chronic cutaneous or 
pulmonary disorders, those on long -tern salicylate therapy, and children receiving corticosteroi ds 
Children who develop severe and life -threatening varicella complications may require hospitalization. 
The following findings are indications for admission to the hospital: 
 Altered consciousness 
 Seizures 
 Difficulty walking 
 Respiratory distress 
 Cyan osis 
 Low oxygen saturation 
Pediatric Hydroxyzine 
Management of pruritus due to chronic urticaria, contact dermatoses, and histamine -mediated pruritus 
<6 years old: 50 mg/day PO divided q6hr 
>6 years old: 50 -100 mg/day PO divided q6hr 
 HAND -FOOT-AND -MOUTH DISEASE 
Hand -foot -and-mouth disease (HMFD) is a viral illness with oral and distal -extremity lesions. It is most 
commonly caused by coxsackievirus A16 and typically affects children and infants. HMFD is highly 
contagious during the first week of infection and may lead to epidemics from direct contact with nasal 
and oral secretions or fecal material. The incubation period typically averages 3 -7 days. Symptoms 
include fever, rash, headache, sore throat, oropharyngeal ulcers, and loss of appetite . The oral lesions 
are typically 2 -3 mm vesicles on an erythematous base. Care is typically supportive with antipyretics and 
anesthetics for symptomatic relief on a case -by-case basis. 
Physical findings include the following: 
 Initially, macular lesio ns appear on the buccal mucosa, tongue, and/or hard palate 
 These mucosal lesions rapidly progress to vesicles that erode and become surrounded by an 
erythematous halo 
 Lesions may also be found on the hands, feet, buttocks, and genitalia 
 A fever of 38 -39°C may be present for 24 -48 hours 
Management 
There is no antiviral agent specific for the etiologic agents of HFMD. Instead, the treatment is 
supportive, as follows: 
 Ensure adequate fluid intake to prevent dehydration; cold liquids are generally preferab le 
 Spicy or acidic substances may cause discomfort 
 Intravenous hydration may be necessary if the patient has moderate -to-severe dehydration or if 
discomfort precludes oral intake 
 Fever may be treated with antipyretics 
 Pain may be treated with standard doses of paracetamol or ibuprofen 
 Direct analgesia may also be applied to the oral cavity via mouthwashes or sprays 
 ERYSIPELAS 
Erysipelas is a type of cellulitis (bacterial skin infection) that extends into the superficial cutaneous 
lymphatics. The most common bacteria responsible are group A streptococci. Infection occurs via 
inoculation into an area of local skin trauma; the legs are most commonly affected, but the face may 
also be infected. Patients may complain of headache, arthralgia/myalgia, a nd/or nausea. In severe 
infections, vesicles, bullae, petechiae, and frank necrosis may be found. The diagnosis is typically clinical. 
Treatment for 10 -20 days is recommended with penicillin (or a first -generation cephalosporin or 
macrolide in penicillin -allergic patients). Elevation and rest of the affected area may help reduce 
swelling. Saline wet dressings should be applied to ulcerated and necrotic lesions. Debridement may be 
required in severe cases with necrosis or gangrene. 
Non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs are contra -indicated (risk of necrotizing fasciitis). 
Hospitalize for the following: children younger than 3 months, critically ill appearing patient, local 
complications, debilitated patient (chronic conditions, the elderly) or if there is a risk of non -compliance 
with or failure of -outpatient treatment. 
Impetigo is a common superficial bacterial infection of skin caused most often by S. aureus and in some 
cases by group A -hemolytic strepto cocci. Lesions caused by staphylococci may be tense, clear bullae, 
and this less common form of the disease is called bullous impetigo . 
 Bullous impetigo with circumscribed le sions with a thin 
collarette of scale. 
Impetigo is the most common bacterial infection in children. 
Signs and symptoms 
Children with nonbullous impetigo commonly have multiple coalescing lesions on their face (perioral, 
perinasal) and extremiti es or in areas with a break in the natural skin defense barrier. The initial lesions 
are small vesicles or pustules (< 2 cm) that rupture and become a honey -colored crust with a moist 
erythematous base. Pharyngitis is absent, but mild regional lymphadenopa thy is commonly present. 
Nonbullous impetigo is usually a self -limited process that resolves within 2 weeks. 
Impetigo usually occurs on exposed areas of the body, most frequently the face and extremities. The 
lesions remain well -localized but are frequentl y multiple and may be either bullous or nonbullous in 
appearance. 
Bullous impetigo also differs from nonbullous impetigo in that bullous impetigo may involve the buccal 
mucous membranes, and regional adenopathy rarely occurs. However, extensive lesions in infants may 
be associated with systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise, generalized weakness, and diarrhea. 
The diagnosis of impetigo is usually made on the basis of the history and physical examination. 
Management 
Treatment of impetigo typica lly involves local wound care in conjunction with either a topical antibiotic 
or a combination of systemic and topical agents. In general, the antibiotic selection has coverage against 
both S aureus and S pyogenes . In areas with a high prevalence of commun ity-acquired MRSA with 
susceptible isolates, children older than 8 years may take clindamycin or doxycycline in cases. 
Topical Antibiotic Treatment 
Mupirocin ointment (Bactroban) has been used for both the lesions and to clear chronic nasal carriers. It 
is applied to the affected area 2 -3 times daily. A 7 -day course is usually standard. 
Clindamycin (cream, lotion, and foam) is useful in several MRSA infections. 
Systemic Antibiotic Treatment 
 Infections that are widespread, complicated, or are associated with systemic manifestations are usually 
treated with antibiotics that have gram -positive bacterial coverage. 
Beta -lactamase resistant antibiotics (eg, cephalosporins , amoxicillin -clavulanate , cloxacillin,) are 
recommended. Cephalexin appears to be the dr ug of choice for oral antimicrobial therapy in children. 
Treat traumatized skin with mupirocin because this has been shown to decrease the rates of impetigo 
spread. Treat preexisting underlying skin diseases, such as atopic dermatitis. Antihistamines and topical 
steroids help decrease scratching. 
Teach good personal hygiene. For example, keep nails short and clean and wash hands frequently with 
antibacterial soap and water or waterless antibacterial cleansers. 
ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA 
Oral hairy leukop lakia often presents as white plaques on the lateral tongue and is associated with 
Epstein -Barr virus infection. 
Patients with oral hairy leukoplakia may report a nonpainful white plaque along the lateral tongue 
borders. The appearance may chan ge daily. The natural history of hairy leukoplakia is variable. Lesions 
may frequently appear and disappear spontaneously. 
Unilateral or bilateral nonpainful white lesions can be seen on the margins, dorsal or ventral surfaces of 
the tongue, or on buccal m ucosa. 
Treatment & Management 
As a benign lesion with low morbidity, oral hairy leukoplakia does not require specific treatment in every 
case. Indications for treatment include symptoms attributable to the lesion, or a patient's desire to 
eliminate the le sion for cosmetic reasons. 
Systemic antiviral therapy usually achieves resolution of the lesion within 1 -2 weeks of therapy. 
Oral therapy with acyclovir requires high doses (800 mg 5 times per day) to achieve therapeutic levels. 
 PRIMARY SYPHILIS 
Syphilis is an infectious venereal disease caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum . Syphilis is 
transmissible by sexual contact with infectious lesions, from mother to fetus in utero, via blood product 
transfusion, and occasionally through breaks in the skin that come into contact with infectious lesions. If 
untreated, it progresses through 4 stages: primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary. 
Because the manifestations of syphilis (particularly advanced syphilis) are nonspecific and may 
masquerade as many other diseases, the physician must keep a high index of suspicion regarding the 
possible diagnosis of syphilis. 
Primary syphilis 
Primary syphilis occurs within 3 weeks of contact with an infected individual. It manifests mainly on the 
glans penis in male s and on the vulva or cervix in females. Ten percent of syphilitic lesions are found on 
the anus, fingers, oropharynx, tongue, nipples, fingers, or other extragenital sites. Regional nontender 
lymphadenopathy follows invasion. 
Lesions (chancres) are usuall y solitary, raised, firm, red papules that can be several centimeters in 
diameter. The chancre erodes to create an ulcerative crater within the papule, with slightly elevated 
edges around the central ulcer. It usually heals within 4 -8 weeks, with or withou t therapy. 
Secondary syphilis 
Secondary syphilis manifests in various ways. It usually presents with a cutaneous eruption within 2 -10 
weeks after the primary chancre and is most florid 3 -4 months after infection. Commonly affect s the 
palms and soles with scaling, firm, red -brown papules. 
Mild constitutional symptoms of malaise, headache, anorexia, nausea, aching pains in the bones, and 
fatigue often are present, as well as fever and neck stiffness. 
 Tertiary syphilis 
Tertiary (late) syphilis is slowly progressive and may affect any organ. The disease is generally not 
thought to be infectious at this stage. Manifestations may include the following: 
 Altered mental status 
 Focal neurologic findings, including sensorineural hearin g and vision loss 
 Dementia 
 Symptoms related to the cardiovascular system or the CNS 
The lesions of benign tertiary syphilis usually develop within 3 -10 years of infection. The typical lesion is 
a gumma, and patient complaints usually are secondary to bon e pain, which is described as a deep 
boring pain characteristically worse at night. 
Congenital syphilis 
Early congenital syphilis occurs within the first 2 years of life. Late congenital syphilis emerges in 
children older than 2 years. 
Treatment & Manage ment 
Penicillin is the treatment of choice for treating syphilis. Patients with known penicillin allergies should 
undergo penicillin allergy skin testing and penicillin desensitization, if necessary. 
The following regimens are recommended for penicillin t reatment: 
 Primary or secondary syphilis - Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM in a single dose 
 Early latent syphilis - Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM in a single dose 
 Late latent syphilis or latent syphilis of unknown duration - Benzathine penicillin G 7.2 million 
units total, administered as 3 doses of 2.4 million units IM each at 1 -week intervals 
 Pregnancy - Treatment appropriate to the stage of syphilis is recommended. 
Tetracycline, erythromycin, and ceftriaxone have shown antitreponemal activity in clinical trials; 
however, they currently are recommended only as alternative treatment regimens in patients allergic to 
penicillin. 
 ERYTHEMA MULTIF ORME 
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an acute, self -limited, and sometimes recurring skin condition that is 
considered to be a type IV hypersensitivity reaction associated with certain infections, medications, and 
other various triggers. 
Eryth ema multiforme major and Stevens -Johnson syndrome (SJS) , however, are more severe, potentially 
life-threatening disorders. Lesions of Steven -Johnson syndrome typically begin on the face and trunk. 
The clinical descriptions are as follows: 
 Erythema multiforme minor - Typical targets or raised, edematous papules distributed acrally 
 Erythema multiforme major - Typical targets or raised, edematous papules distributed acrally 
with involveme nt of one or more mucous membranes; epidermal detachment involves less than 
10% of TBSA. 
 SJS/TEN - Widespread blisters predominant on the trunk and face, presenting with 
erythematous or pruritic macules and one or more mucous membrane erosions; epidermal 
detachment is less than 10% TBSA for Steven -Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis 
and 30% or more for toxic epidermal necrolysis. 
Most cases of erythema multiforme (EM) are self -limited. In erythema multiforme minor, the lesions 
evolve over 1 -2 w eeks and ultimately subside within 2 -3 weeks without scarring. However, the 
recurrence of erythema multiforme minor is common (up to one third of cases) and mostly preceded by 
apparent or subclinical HSV infection. 
Prodromal symptoms are usually absent or mild in persons with erythema multiforme minor, consisting 
of a mild, nonspecific upper respiratory tract infection. The abrupt onset of a rash usually occurs within 
3 days, starting on the extremities symmetrically, with centripetal spreading. P ruritus is generally absent 
The initial lesion is a dull -red, purpuric macule or urticarial plaque that expands slightly to a maximum of 
2 cm over 24 -48 hours. In the center, a small papule, vesicle, or bulla develops, flattens, and then may 
clear. An inte rmediate ring develops and becomes raised, pale, and edematous. The periphery gradually 
changes to become cyanotic or violaceous and forms a typical concentric, “target” lesion. 
Mild temperature elevation is usually noted. Hyperventilation and mild hypoxi a may result from anxiety 
or tracheobronchial involvement. 
Treatment & Management 
 For all forms of erythema multiforme (EM), the most important treatment is usually symptomatic, 
including oral antihistamines, analgesics, local skin care, and soothing mout hwashes (eg, oral rinsing 
with warm saline or a solution of diphenhydramine, xylocaine, and). Topical steroids may be considered. 
In severe cases, prehospital personnel may need to treat respiratory complications and fluid imbalances 
aggressively, in the s ame manner as thermal burns. 
Avoid systemic corticosteroids in minor cases. In severe cases, their use is controversial, because these 
agents do not improve prognosis and may increase risk of complications. 
Hospitalization 
Erythema multiforme (EM) major m ay require hospitalization for the treatment of complications and 
sequelae (eg, severe mucous membrane involvement is present or with impaired oral intake, 
dehydration, or secondary infection) and to manage the patient's fluid and electrolytes. The most se vere 
cases should be managed in intensive care or burn units. 
 EYE DISEASES 
 ACUTE CONJUNCTIVITIS 
This term describes any inflammatory process that involves the conjunctiva; however, to most patients, 
conju nctivitis (often called pink eye) is a diagnosis in its own right. As with any mucous membrane, 
infectious agents may adhere to the conjunctiva, thus overwhelming normal defense mechanisms and 
producing clinical symptoms of redness, discharge, irritation, and possibly photophobia. 
Clinical Evaluation 
In classic presentations, patients complain of eyelids sticking together on waking. They may describe 
itching and burning or a gritty, foreign -body sensation. Pus sliding across the eye may distort vision, 
although visual acuity is normal. Photophobia is minimal. 
Bilateral disease is typically infectious or allergic. Unilateral disease suggests toxic, chemical, mechanical, 
or lacrimal origin. 
Bacterial Conjunctivitis 
Bacterial conjunctivitis is characterized by acute onset, minimal pain, occasional pruritus, and, 
sometimes, exposure history. Ocular surface disease (eg, keratitis sicca, trichiasis, chronic blepharitis) 
predisposes the patient to bacterial conjunctivitis. Staphylococcal and streptococcal species a re the 
most common pathogens. 
Allergic Conjunctivitis 
Allergic conjunctivitis is characterized by acute or subacute onset, no pain, and no exposure history. 
Pruritus is extremely common and the hallmark symptom of this condition. Clear, watery discharge is 
typical, with or without a moderate amount of mucus production. 
Prehospital and ED Management 
Prehospital transport is rarely indicated for patients with conjunctivitis. More serious concerns may 
warrant EMS transport. Prehospital personnel, emergency physicians, and other medical personnel must 
be careful not to transmit this infection and should not overlook more serious comorbidity. Thorough 
hand washing, glove use, and using eye drops in individual or unit dose containers are necessary. 
Treatment is often supportive. Artificial tears help the discomfort of keratitis and photophobia. Cold, 
moist compresses improve the swelling and discomfort of the lids. Antibiotic drops help prevent a 
secondary bacterial infection. Reserve topical corticosteroids f or use by an ophthalmologist when 
substantial inflammation is present and herpes simplex is excluded. 
Clean eyes 4 to 6 times/day with boiled water or 0.9% sodium chloride 
Broad -spectrum antibiotics, such as nafloxin (ciprofloxacin) or exocin (ofloxacin), are good choices (2 
times/day into both eyes for 7 days). 
Consult with an ophthalmologist for all serious eye complaints. Simple conjunctivitis usually can be 
followed up by the patient's primary care provider. 
 XEROPHTHALMIA 
Is a medical condition in wh ich the eye fails to produce tears. It may be caused by vitamin A deficiency, 
which is sometimes used to describe that condition, although there may be other causes. 
Xerophthalmia caused by a severe vitamin A deficiency is described by pathologic dryness o f the 
conjunctiva and cornea. The conjunctiva becomes dry, thick and wrinkled. If untreated, it can lead to 
corneal ulceration and ultimately to blindness as a result of corneal damage. 
Xerophthalmia usually affects children under nine years old. 
Prophylax is consists of periodic administration of Vitamin A supplements. WHO recommended 
schedule, which is universally recommended is as follows: 
 Infants 6 –12 months old and any older children weighing less than 8 kg - 100,000 IU orally every 
3–6 months 
 Children over 1 year and under 6 years of age - 200,000 IU orally every 6 months 
 Infants less than 6 months old, who are not being breastfed - 50,000 IU orally should be given 
before they attain the age of 6 months 
Treatment can occur in two ways: treating symptoms and treating the deficiency. Treatment of 
symptoms usually includes use of artificial tears in the form of eye drops, increasing the humidity of the 
environment with humidifiers, and wearing wrap around glasses when outdoors. Treatment of the 
deficiency c an be accomplished with a Vitamin A or multivitamin supplement or by eating foods rich in 
Vitamin A. 
 VIRAL DISEASES 
Influenza, one of the most common infectious diseases, is a highly contagious airborne dis ease that 
occurs in seasonal epidemics and manifests as an acute febrile illness with variable degrees of systemic 
symptoms, ranging from mild fatigue to respiratory failure and death. 
Signs and symptoms 
The presentation of influenza virus infection varies , but it usually includes many of the following signs 
and symptoms: 
 Sore throat 
 Myalgias 
 Frontal or retro -orbital headache 
 Nasal discharge 
 Weakness and severe fatigue 
 Cough and other respiratory symptoms 
 Tachycardia 
 Red, watery eyes 
Fever m ay vary widely among patients, with some having low fevers (in the 37.7°C range) and others 
developing fevers as high as 40°C. Some patients report feeling feverish and feeling chills. 
In children, diarrhea may be a feature. 
The incubation period of influ enza is 2 days long on average but may range from 1 to 4 days in length. 
Aerosol transmission may occur 1 day before the onset of symptoms; thus, it may be possible for 
transmission to occur via asymptomatic persons or persons with subclinical disease, who may be 
unaware that they have been exposed to the disease. 
Influenza has traditionally been diagnosed on the basis of clinical criteria. 
The criterion standard for diagnosing influenza A and B is a viral culture of nasopharyngeal samples or 
throat samples. In elderly or high -risk patients with pulmonary symptoms, chest radiography should be 
performed to exclude pneumonia. 
Management 
Prevention 
Prevention of influenza is the most effective management strategy. Influenza A and B vaccine is 
admini stered each year before flu season. 
Patients with influenza generally benefit from bed rest. Most patients with influenza recover in 3 days; 
however, malaise may persist for weeks. 
Patients most often require hospitalization when influenza exace rbates underlying chronic diseases. 
1. Rest until the flu is fully resolved, especially if the illness has been severe. 
2. Fluids – Drink enough fluids so that you do not become dehydrated. 
3. Paracetamol can relieve fever, headache, and muscle aches. 
4. Cough medic ines are not usually helpful; cough usually resolves without treatment. 
Following is a list of all the health and age factors that are known to increase a person’s risk of getting 
serious complications from the flu: 
  People younger than 19 years of age on long - term aspirin therapy 
 People with COPD 
 Weakened immune system due to disease or medication (such as people with HIV or AIDS, or 
cancer, or those on chronic steroids) 
Other people at high risk from the flu: 
 Adults 65 years and older 
 Children youn ger than 5 years old, but especially children younger than 2 years old d 
 Pregnant women and women up to 2 weeks after the end of pregnancy 
 Blood disorders (such as sickle cell disease) 
 Chronic lung disease (such as COPD and cystic fibrosis) 
 Endocrine disorders (such as diabetes mellitus) 
 Heart disease (such as congenital heart disease, congestive heart failure and coronary artery 
 Kidney disorders 
 Liver disorders 
 Metabolic disorders (such as inherited metabolic disorders and mitoc hondrial disorders) 
 Morbid obesity 
 Neurological and neurodevelopmental conditions 
Supportive care for pediatric influenza can include the following : 
 Paracetamol for fever 
 Cough suppressants and expectorants 
 Steam inhalation 
 Oral or intravenous fluids if dehydration occurs 
 Antiviral therapy for selected patients 
Who should take antiviral drugs? 
• People who are very sick with the flu (for example, people who are in the hospital). 
• People who are sick with the flu and have a high -risk health conditio n like asthma, diabetes or chronic 
heart disease. 
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) 
It must be administered within 48 hours of symptom onset. The sooner it is taken after symptom onset, 
the better the effect. 
Adults: 75 mg PO q12hr x5 days 
Pediatric: 
<2 weeks: Safet y and efficacy not established for treatment 
Aged 2 weeks to <1 year 
 3 mg/kg PO BID x5 days 
 <15 kg: 30 mg PO q12hr x5 days 
 15-23 kg: 45 mg PO q12hr x5 days 
 23-40 kg: 60 mg PO q12hr x5 days 
 >40 kg: 75 mg PO q12hr x5 days 
 POLIO (POLIOMYELITIS) 
Acute poliomyelitis is caused by small ribonucleic acid (RNA) viruses. 
Acute poliomyelitis is a disease of the anterior horn motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain stem 
caused by poliovirus. Flaccid asymmetric weakness and muscle atrophy are the hallmarks of its clinical 
manifestations, due to loss of motor neurons and denervation of their ass ociated skeletal muscles. 
As of 2006, 6 countries were endemic to polio: Afghanistan, Egypt, India, Niger, Nigeria, and Pakistan. 
Most cases of acute poliomyelitis occur in the pediatric population. Infection or immunization against 
poliovirus provides lif elong protection. 
Clinical Presentation 
Most patients (95%) with poliomyelitis virus infections are asymptomatic or have only mild systemic 
symptoms, such as pharyngitis or gastroenteritis. These cases are referred to as minor illness or abortive 
poliomye litis. The mild symptoms are related to viremia and immune response against dissemination of 
the virus. Only 5% of patients exhibit different severities of nervous system involvement, from 
nonparalytic poliomyelitis to the most severe form of paralytic pol iomyelitis. 
Nonparalytic poliomyelitis or preparalytic poliomyelitis 
 The prodromal symptoms include generalized, nonthrobbing headache; fever of 38 -40 º C; sore 
throat; anorexia; nausea; vomiting; and muscle aches. These symptoms may or may not subside 
in 1-2 weeks. 
 Headache and fever, as well as signs and symptoms of nervous system involvement (eg, 
irritability, restlessness, apprehensiveness, emotional instability, stiffness of the neck and back) 
and Kernig and Brudzinski signs because of meningitis, th en may follow. 
 Children generally exhibit milder systemic symptoms than do adults. 
 Preparalytic symptoms also may develop into paralytic ones. 
Paralytic poliomyelitis 
 The incubation period from virus exposure to the neurologic phase can last 4 -10 days b ut may 
extend to 4 -5 weeks. 
 Severe muscle pain and spasms, followed by weakness, develop. Muscle weakness tends to 
become maximal within 48 hours but may develop for longer than a week. No progression of 
weakness should be noted after the temperature drops to normal for 48 hours. Weakness is 
asymmetric, with the lower limbs affected more than upper limbs. 
 Muscle tone is flaccid, and the reflexes initially are brisk but then become absent. The transient 
or occasionally persistent coarse fasciculations also are observed frequently in patients with 
paralytic poliomyelitis. 
 Patients also complain of paresthesias in the affected limbs without real sensation loss. 
 Paralysis remains for days or weeks before slow recovery occurs over months or years. Which 
factors favor development of paralytic disease remains unclear, but some evidence exists that 
physical activity and intramuscular injections during the prodrome may be important 
exacerbating factors. 
 The encephalitic form of poliomyelitis 
 This form is very rare and manifests as agitation, confusion, stupor, and coma. 
 Autonomic dysfunction is common, and it has a high mortality. 
Vital signs are the key to monitoring patients with poliovirus infection. 
 Muscle weakness can be assessed by muscle strength testing . 
o Usually asymmetric proximal weakness is present with more involvement of lumbar 
than cervical segments and more spinal cord than brainstem segments. 
o The trunk muscles are affected least. 
o Sensation should be within normal limits objectively. 
o Deep tendon reflexes are diminished or absent. 
o Atrophy of muscle may be detected 3 weeks after onset of paralysis, which becomes 
maximal at 12 -15 weeks and remains permanent. 
Medical Issues/Complications 
Immediate communication to stakeholders and health professional s at national and local level 
No specific treatment exists for acute poliomyelitis except supportive care, which may help to ensure 
survival, modify the disability, and improve the outcome. 
All patients should be placed on bedrest in an isolation unit. Mon itor patients' vital signs carefully; focus 
especially on the swallowing function, vital capacity, pulse, and blood pressure, in anticipation of 
respiratory or circulatory complications. 
Cholera is an acute diarrheal illness caused by an intestinal infection with the bacteria Vibrio cholerae ; it 
affects only humans. The bacteria release a toxin that causes increased release of water from intestinal 
cells, resulting in severe diarrhea. The main reservoirs for V cholerae are people and a quatic/marine 
sources (eg, brackish water, estuaries) that are often associated with algal blooms; people become 
infected by eating or drinking fecal - or vomitus -contaminated food or water, particularly during cholera 
epidemics. Cholera can quickly spread through areas with inadequate water treatment, poor sanitation, 
and populations with inadequate personal hygiene, problems commonly seen in situations of war, 
famine, and crowding. Cholera is common in developing regions (eg, Africa, Asia, India, Mexico, S outh 
and Central America). Early detection and preventative measures such as the practice of good hygiene 
and the establishment of clean food and water supplies and sanitation are essential to minimizing the 
spread of cholera during epidemics. 
Clinical Pre sentation 
After a 24 - to 48 -hour incubation period, symptoms begin with the sudden onset of painless watery 
diarrhea that may quickly become voluminous and is often followed by vomiting. The patient may 
experience accompanying abdominal cramps, probably fr om distention of loops of small bowel as a 
result of the large volume of intestinal secretions. Fever is typically absent. 
Cholera should be suspected when a patient older than 5 years develops severe dehydration from acute, 
severe, watery diarrhea (usual ly without vomiting) or in any patient older than 2 years who has acute 
watery diarrhea and is in an area where an outbreak of cholera has occurred. 
Stool volume during cholera is more than that of any other infectious diarrhea. Patients with severe 
diseas e may have a stool volume of more than 250 mL/kg body weight in a 24 -hour period. Because of 
the large volume of diarrhea, patients with cholera have frequent and often uncontrolled bowel 
movements. 
The stool may contain fecal material early in the course of clinical illness. The characteristic cholera stool 
is an opaque white liquid that is not malodorous and often is described as having a “rice water” 
appearance (ie, in color and consistency, it resembles water that has been used to wash or cook rice). 
Vomiting, although a prominent manifestation, may not always be present. Early in the course of the 
disease, vomiting is caused by decreased gastric and intestinal motility; later in the course of the disease 
it is more likely to result from acidemia. 
Dehy dration 
If untreated, the diarrhea and vomiting lead to isotonic dehydration, which can lead to acute tubular 
necrosis and renal failure. In patients with severe disease, vascular collapse, shock, and death may 
ensue. Dehydration can develop with remarkabl e rapidity, within hours after the onset of symptoms. 
Clinical signs of cholera parallel the level of volume contraction. The amount of fluid loss and the 
corresponding clinical signs of cholera are as follows: 
 3-5% loss of normal body weight - Excessive thirst 
 5-8% loss of normal body weight - Postural hypotension, tachycardia, weakness, fatigue, dry 
mucous membranes or dry mouth 
 >10% loss of normal body weight - Oliguria; glassy or sunken eyes; sunken fontanelles in infants; 
weak, thready, or absent p ulse; wrinkled "washerwoman" skin; somnolence; coma 
Treatment & Management 
Immediate communication to stakeholders and health professionals at national and local level 
Rehydration is the first priority in the treatment of cholera. Rehydration is accom plished in 2 phases: 
rehydration and maintenance. 
The goal of the rehydration phase is to restore normal hydration status, which should take no more than 
4 hours. Set the rate of intravenous infusion in severely dehydrated patients at 50 -100 mL/kg/hr. 
Lactated Ringer solution is preferred over isotonic sodium chloride solution because saline does not 
correct metabolic acidosis 
The goal of the maintenance phase is to maintain normal hydration status by replacing ongoing losses. 
The oral route is preferred, a nd the use of oral rehydration solution (ORS) at a rate of 500 -1000 mL/hr is 
recommended. 
Fluid Replacement for Dehydration 
dehydration Intravenous (IV) drips of Ringer Lactate 
or, if not available, normal saline and oral 
rehydration salts as outl ined below  100 mL/kg in 3 -h period (in 6 h for children < 1 
 Start rapidly (30 mL/kg within 30 min, then 
slow down) 
 Total amount for first 24 h: 200 L/kg 
dehydration Oral rehydration salts (amount in first 4 
h)  Infants < 4 mo (< 5 kg): 200 –400 m L 
 Infants 4 –11 mo (5 –7.9 kg): 400 –600 mL 
 Children 1 –2 y (8 –10.9 kg): 600 –800 mL 
 Children 2 –4 y (11 –15.9 kg): 800 –1200 mL 
 Children 5 –14 y (16 –29.9 kg): 1200 –2200 mL 
 Patients >14 y (≥30 kg): 2200 –4000 mL 
dehydration Oral rehydration salts  Children < 2 y: 50 –100 mL, up to 500 mL/day 
 Children 2 –9 y: 100 –200 mL, up to 1000 
 Patients >9 y: As much as wanted, up to 2000 
Approximate Amount of Oral Rehydration Solution to Administer in the First 4 Hours 
Age < 4 mo 4-11 mo 12-23 mo 2-4 y 5-14 y ≥15 y 
Weight < 5 kg 5-7.9 kg 8-10.9 kg 11-15.9 kg 16-29.9 kg ≥30 kg 
Antibiotic Treatment 
An effective antibiotic can reduce the volume of diarrhea in patients with severe cholera a nd shorten 
the period during which V cholerae O1 is excreted. In addition, it usually stops the diarrhea within 48 
hours, thus shortening the period of hospitalization. Whenever possible, antibiotic therapy should be 
guided by susceptibility reports. 
Antib iotic treatment is indicated for severely dehydrated patients who are older than 2 years. Begin 
antibiotic therapy after the patient has been rehydrated (usually in 4 -6 h) and vomiting has stopped. No 
advantage exists to using injectable antibiotics, which are expensive. No other drugs should be used in 
 the treatment of cholera. Antimicrobial agents typically are administered for 3 -5 days. However, single -
dose therapy with tetracycline, doxycycline, furazolidone, or ciprofloxacin has been shown effective in 
reducing the duration and volume of diarrhea. Because single dose doxycycline has been shown to be as 
effective as multiple doses of tetracycline, this has become the preferred regimen. 
Antimicrobial Therapy Used in the Treatment of Cholera* 
Antibiot ic Single Dose (PO) Multiple Dose (PO) 
Doxycycline† 7 mg/kg; not to 
exceed 300 
mg/dose‡ 2 mg/kg bid on day 1; then 2 mg/kg qd on days 2 and 3; not to 
exceed 100 mg/dose 
Tetracycline† 25 mg/kg; not to 
exceed 1 g/dose‡ 40 mg/kg/d divided qid for 3 d; no t to exceed 2 g/d 
Furazolidone 7 mg/kg; not to 
exceed 300 
mg/dose 5 mg/kg/d divided qid for 3 d; not to exceed 400 mg/d 
Trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole Not evaluated < 2 months: Contraindicated 
≥2 months: 5 -10 mg/kg/d (based on trimethoprim component) 
divided bid for 3 d; not to exceed 320 mg/d trimethoprim and 1.6 
g/d of sulfamethoxazole 
Ciprofloxacin§ 30 mg/kg; not to 
exceed 1 g/dose‡ 30 mg/kg/d divided q12h for 3 d ; not to exceed 2 g/d 
Ampicillin Not evaluated 50 mg/kg/d divided qid for 3 d; not to exceed 2 g/d 
Erythromycin Not evaluated 40 mg/kg/d erythromycin base divided tid for 3 d; not to exceed 1 
* Antimicrobial therapy is an adjunct to fluid therapy of cholera and is not an essential component. However, it 
reduces diarrhea volume and duration by approximately 50%. The choice of antibiotics is determined by the 
susceptibility patterns of the local strains of V cholerae O1 or O139. 
† Tetracycline and dox ycycline can discolor permanent teeth of children younger than 8 years. However, the risk is 
small when these drugs are used for short courses of therapy, especially if used in a single dose. 
‡ Single -dose therapy of these drugs has not been evaluated sys tematically in children, and recommendations are 
extrapolated from experience in adults. 
§ Fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin) are not approved in the United States for use in persons younger than 18 
years. When given in high doses to juvenile animals, t hey cause arthropathy. Clinical experience indicates that this 
risk is very small in children when used for short courses of therapy. 
 WHO Guidelines for Cholera Management 
Steps in the treatment of a patient with suspected cholera are as follows: 
1. Assess for dehydration (see Table 1) 
2. Rehydrate the patient and monitor frequently, then reassess hydration status 
3. Maintain hydration; replace ongoing fluid losses until diarrhea stops 
4. Administer an oral antibiotic to the patient with severe dehydration 
5. Feed the patient 
More detailed guidelines for the treatment of cholera are as follows: 
 Evaluate the degree of dehydration upon arrival 
 Rehydrate the patient in 2 phases; these include rehydration (for 2 -4 h) and maintenance ( until diarrhea 
 Register output and intake volumes on predesigned charts and periodically review these data 
 Use the intravenous route only (1) during the rehydration phase for severely dehydrated patients for 
whom an infusion rate of 50 -100 mL/kg/ h is advised, (2) for moderately dehydrated patients who do not 
tolerate the oral route, and (3) during the maintenance phase in patients considered high stool purgers 
(ie, >10 mL/kg/h) 
 During the maintenance phase, use oral rehydration solution at a rate of 800 -1000 mL/h; match ongoing 
losses with ORS administration 
 Discharge patients to the treatment center if oral tolerance is greater than or equal to 1000 mL/h, urine 
volume is greater than or equal to 40 mL/h, and stool volume is less than or equal to 400 mL/h. 
Malaria is a potentially life -threatening disease caused by infection with Plasmodium protozoa 
transmitted by an infective female Anopheles mosquito. Plasmodium falciparum infection carries a poor 
prognosis wi th a high mortality if untreated, but it has an excellent prognosis if diagnosed early and 
treated appropriately. 
Signs and symptoms 
Patients with malaria typically become symptomatic a few weeks after infection, though the 
symptomatology and incubation p eriod may vary, depending on host factors and the causative species. 
Clinical symptoms include the following: 
 Headache (noted in virtually all patients with malaria) 
 Shaking chills 
 Arthralgia 
 Paroxysm of fever, shaking chills, and sweats (every 48 or 72 hours, depending on species) 
Less common symptoms include the following: 
 Anorexia and lethargy 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Diarrhea 
 Jaundice 
Most patients with malaria have no specific physical findings, but splenomegaly may be present. Severe 
malaria manifests as the following: 
 Cerebral malaria (sometimes with coma) 
 Severe anemia 
 Respiratory abnormalities: Include metabolic acidosis, associated respiratory distress, and 
pulmonary edema; signs of malarial hyperpneic syndrom e include alar flaring, chest retraction, 
use of accessory muscles for respiration, and abnormally deep breathing 
 Renal failure (typically reversible) 
The patient history should include inquiries into the following: 
 Recent or remote travel to an endemic area 
 Immune status, age, and pregnancy status 
 Allergies or other medical conditions 
 Medications currently being taken 
 Blood studies 
 If the patient is to be treated with primaquine, glucose -6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
Most patient s with malaria have no specific physical findings, but splenomegaly may be present. 
Symptoms of malarial infection are nonspecific and may manifest as a flulike illness with fever, 
headache, malaise, fatigue, and muscle aches. Some patients with malaria pr esent with diarrhea and 
 other gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Immune individuals may be completely asymptomatic or may 
present with mild anemia. Nonimmune patients may quickly become very ill. 
In returning travelers from endemic areas, malaria is suggested by the triad of thrombocytopenia, 
elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, and atypical lymphocytes. These findings should prompt 
obtaining malarial smears. 
Rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) 
Rapid tests detect parasite antigens. They give only a qualitativ e result (positive or negative) and may 
remain positive several days or weeks following effective treatment. 
Note : even with positive diagnostic results, rule out other causes of fever. 
Patients with suspected malaria should have parasitological confirmat ion of diagnosis with either 
microscopy or rapid diagnostic test (RDT) before antimalarial treatment is started. Treatment based on 
clinical grounds should only be given if diagnostic testing is not immediately accessible within two hours 
of patients prese nting for treatment. 
Definition of uncomplicated malaria 
A patient who presents with symptoms of malaria and a positive parasitological test (microscopy or RDT) 
but with no features of severe malaria is defined as having uncomplicated malaria 
Management 
Immediate communication to stakeholders and health professionals at national and local level 
Treatment is influenced by the species causing the infection, including the following: 
 Plasmodium falciparum 
 P malariae 
 P knowlesi 
Patients w ith P falciparum infection are often treated on an inpatient basis to allow observation for 
complications. Patients with non – P falciparum malaria who are well can usually be treated on an 
outpatient basis. 
General recommendations for pharmacologic treatme nt of malaria are as follows: 
 P falciparum malaria: Quinine -based therapy is with quinine (or quinidine) sulfate plus 
doxycycline or clindamycin or pyrimethamine -sulfadoxine; alternative therapies are artemether -
lumefantrine, atovaquone -proguanil, or meflo quine 
 P falciparum malaria with known chloroquine susceptibility (only a few areas in Central America 
and the Middle East): Chloroquine 
 P vivax, P ovale malaria: Chloroquine plus primaquine 
 P malariae malaria: Chloroquine 
 P knowlesi malaria: Same recom mendations as for P falciparum malaria 
Pregnant women (especially primigravidas) are up to 10 times more likely to contract malaria than 
nongravid women and have a greater tendency to develop severe malaria. Medications that can be used 
for the treatment of malaria in pregnancy include the following: 
 Chloroquine 
  Atovaquone -proguanil 
 Clindamycin 
 Mefloquine (avoid in first trimester) 
Pediatrics 
In children, malaria has a shorter course, often rapidly progressing to severe malaria. Children are more 
likely to present with hypoglycemia, seizures, severe anemia, and sudden death, but they are much less 
likely to develop renal failure, pulmonary edema, or jaundice. 
Cerebral malaria results in neurologic sequelae in 9 -26% of children, but of these se quelae, 
approximately one half completely resolve with time. 
Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Treat children and adults with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant women in their 
first trimester) with one of the following recommended ACTs: 
• artemether + lumefantrine 
• artesunate + amodiaquine 
• artesunate + mefloquine 
• dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
• artesunate + sulfadoxine –pyrimethamine (SP). 
Duration of ACT treatment 
ACT re gimens should provide 3 days’ treatment with an artemisinin derivative. 
Revised dose recommendation for dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine in young children 
Children weighing <25kg treated with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine should receive a minimum of 
2.5 mg/kg bw per day of dihydroartemisinin and 20 mg/ kg bw per day of piperaquine daily for 3 days. 
Reducing the transmissibility of treated P. falciparum infections 
In low -transmission areas, give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine with ACT to pati ents with P. 
falciparum malaria (except pregnant women, infants aged < 6 months and women breastfeeding infants 
aged < 6 months) to reduce transmission. G6PD testing is not required. 
 BACTERIAL DISEASES 
 Pediatric Bacterial Meningitis 
Pediatric bacterial meningitis is a life -threatening illness that results from bacterial infection of the 
meninges and leaves some survivors with significant sequelae. 
Signs and symptoms 
The 3 classi c symptoms (less likely in younger children): 
 Headache 
 Meningeal signs 
Symptoms in neonates : 
 Poor feeding 
 Lethargy 
 Irritability 
 Listlessness 
 Hypothermia 
 Seizures 
 Jaundice 
 Bulging fontanelle 
 Hypotonia 
 Shrill cry 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Intractable metabolic acidosis 
Symptoms in infants and children: 
 Nuchal rigidity 
 Opisthotonos 
 Bulging fontanelle 
 Convulsions 
 Photophobia 
 Headache 
 Alterations of the sensorium 
 Irritability 
 Lethargy 
 Anorexia 
 Vomiti ng 
 Fever (generally present, although some severely ill children present with hypothermia) 
The younger the child, the less likely he or she is to exhibit the classic symptoms of fever, headache, and 
meningeal signs. 
 Infants and children 
Kernig (A) and Brudzinski (B) signs are helpful indicators when present, but they may be absent (along 
with nuchal rigidity) in very young, debilitated, or malnourished infants. Skin findings range from a 
nonspecific blanching, erythematous, maculopapular rash to a petechial or purpuric rash, and most 
characteristic of meningococcal meningitis. 
Definitive diagnosis is based on the following: 
 Bacteria isolated from the CSF obtained via lumbar puncture 
 Meningeal inflammation demonstrated by increased pleocytosis, elevated protein level, and low 
glucose level in the CSF 
 Management in the pre -hospital setting 
Recognize shock and manage urgently in secondary care 
Primary care healthcare professionals should transfer children and young people with suspected 
bacterial meningitis or suspected meningococcal septicaemia to secondary care as an emergency 
 General supportive care is requ ired, depending on the child’s condition. Subsequent diagnosis of a 
potentially transmissible disease must be communicated to prehospital care providers, especially with N 
meningitidis infections. 
If the child is critically ill or experiencing a seizure, i mmediate stabilization and support are necessary. If 
the child is hemodynamically stable, IV fluids should be administered at maintenance. Careful record of 
the patient’s weight, urine specific gravity, and serum osmolarity will help guide further fluid th erapy. 
Patients who present with dehydration should be rehydrated and should not undergo fluid restriction. 
Seizures should be treated promptly and should be expected at any time during the initial management. 
By prescribing the correct type and volume of fluid, the risk of brain edema can be minimized. The child 
should receive sufficient amounts of fluid to maintain systolic blood pressure at around 80 mm Hg, 
urinary output at 500 mL/m2/day, and adequate tissue perfusion. 
Administration of antimicrobial agents to contacts is divided into high - and low -risk categories. Only 
contacts stratified as high -risk require prophylaxis. Candidates for chemoprophylaxis against 
meningococcal disease include the following: 
 All household contacts 
 Childcare or nursery s chool contacts during the 7 days before illness onset 
 Contacts directly exposed to index case secretions through kissing, sharing toothbrushes or 
eating utensils, or other markers of close social contact during the 7 days before illness onset 
 Persons who had mouth -to-mouth resuscitation or unprotected contact during endotracheal 
intubation in the 7 days before illness onset 
 Contacts who frequently slept or ate in the same dwelling as the index patient during the 7 days 
before illness onset 
Chemoprophy laxis for Meningococcal Disease 
Adults and children >12 years 1st line: Rifampicin 600mg every 12 hours for 4 doses 
2nd line: Ciprofloxacin 500mg po stat 
Female adults on the oral contraceptive pill Ciprofloxacin 500mg po stat 
Pregnant women Ceftriaxo ne 250mg im stat 
Children: 1 -12 years Rifampicin syrup 10mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses 
Children 0 – 11 months Rifampicin syrup 5mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses 
Chemoprophylaxis for Hib Disease 
Children and adults Rifampicin 20mg/kg once daily fo r 4 days up to max of 
Infants under 1 year of age Rifampicin 10mg/kg once daily for 4 days 
Pregnant women Not indicated 
Notes on rifampicin: Rifampicin may colour urine / tears red and stain contact lenses – do not wear contact lenses 
for a few days after rifampicin treatment. 
 PEDIATRIC ASEPTIC MENINGITIS 
Pediatric aseptic meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges caused mainly by nonbacterial 
organisms, specific agents, or other disease processes. Aseptic meningitis (including viral meningitis) is 
the most common infection of the CNS in the pediatric population, occurring most frequently in children 
younger than 1 year. 
Because the classic signs and symptoms are often absent, especially in younger children, diagnosing 
pediatric CNS infections is a challenge to the emergency department (ED). 
Clinical Presentation 
Headache, neck stiffness, and photophobia are classic symptoms of aseptic meningitis in older children. 
These symptoms may be absent in younger children, who more common ly present with rash, diarrhea, 
and cough. Fever may be present. Seizures are more common in aseptic meningitis caused by specific 
viruses (eg, arboviruses). Other nonspecific symptoms may include arthralgia, myalgia, sore throat, 
weakness, and lethargy an d hypotonia. 
Onset is usually acute but can be insidious over the week before presentation or can follow an acute 
febrile illness. Rash, when present, is erythematous, maculopapular, and vesicular, appearing on the 
soles of the feet, palms, or mucous membr anes. Fever may last up to 5 days. Anorexia, nausea, and 
vomiting are common. Sore throat may occur. Rare symptoms include flaccid paralysis. 
Physical Examination 
The younger the child, the less specific the signs: In a young infant, findings that definit ely point to 
meningitis are rare, but as the child grows older, the physical examination becomes more reliable. 
The infant may be febrile or hypothermic. Lymphadenopathy may be present. Bulging of the fontanel, 
diastasis of the sutures and nuchal rigidity point to meningitis but are usually late findings. Examination 
should specifically exclude a nonblanching petechial rash, other signs of bacterial meningitis. 
Neurologic examination includes evaluating for signs of meningism (eg, headache, photophobia, ne ck 
stiffness, and positive Kernig or Brudzinski sign) and focal or generalized neurologic signs. 
A definitive diagnosis of meningitis requires examination of CSF via lumbar puncture. 
Treatment & Management 
Management of pediatric aseptic meningitis is pr imarily supportive. Consultation with a pediatrician, an 
infectious disease specialist, a critical care specialist, or combinations thereof may be needed. 
Administer adequate analgesia. Treat seizures with appropriate emergency therapies. 
Tetanus is a severe infection due to the bacillus Clostridium tetani , which is found in soil, and human and 
animal waste. Tetanus can be acquired outdoors as well as indoors. The source of infection usually is a 
wound (approximately 65% of cases), w hich often is minor (eg, from wood or metal splinters or thorns). 
Tetanus may be categorized into the following 4 clinical types: 
 Generalized tetanus 
 Localized tetanus 
 Cephalic tetanus 
 Neonatal tetanus 
Approximately 50 -75% of patients with generalized tetanus present with trismus (“lockjaw”), which is 
the inability to open the mouth secondary to masseter muscle spasm. Nuchal rigidity and dysphagia are 
also early complaints that cause risus sardonicus, the scornful smile of tetanus, resulting from facial 
muscle involvement. 
Localized tetanus present with persistent rigidity in the muscle group close to the injury site. 
Cephalic tetanus is uncommon and usually occurs after head trauma or otitis media. Patients with this 
form present with cranial nerve (CN) palsies. The infection may be localized or may become generalized. 
A high risk of mortality is associated with the following: 
 Short incubation period 
 Early onset of convulsions 
 Delay in treatment 
 Contaminated lesions of the head and the face 
 Neonatal tetanus 
Most cases of tetanus occur in patients with a history of underimmunization, either because they were 
never vaccinated or because they completed a primary series but have not had a booster in the 
preceding 10 years. 
The median incubation period is 7 days, and for most cases (73%), incubation ranges from 4 to 14 days. 
Physical Examination 
Common first signs of tetanus are headache and muscular stiffness in the jaw (ie, lockjaw), followed by 
neck stiffness, difficulty swallowing, rigidity of abdom inal muscles, spasms, and sweating. Patients often 
are afebrile. Stimulation of the posterior pharyngeal wall may elicit reflex spasms of the masseter 
muscles that cause patients to bite down as opposed to gag. 
Severe tetanus results in opisthotonos, flexi on of the arms, extension of the legs, periods of apnea 
resulting from spasm of the intercostal muscles and diaphragm, and rigidity of the abdominal wall. Late 
in the disease, autonomic dysfunction develops, with hypertension and tachycardia alternating wi th 
hypotension and bradycardia; cardiac arrest may occur. 
Tetanic seizures may occur. Their presence portends a poor prognosis, and their frequency and severity 
are related to the severity of the disease. These seizures resemble epileptic seizures, with th e presence 
of a sudden burst of tonic contractions. However, the patient does not lose consciousness and usually 
experiences severe pain. 
Seizures frequently occur in the muscle groups causing opisthotonos, flexion and abduction of the arms, 
clenching of t he fists against the thorax, and extension of the lower extremities. Patients with tetanus 
may present with abdominal tenderness and guarding, mimicking an acute abdomen. 
 Treatment & Management 
Immediate communication to stakeholders and health prof essionals at national and local level. An 
intensive care medicine specialist should be the primary physician coordinating the patient’s care. 
The goals of treatment in patients with tetanus include the following: 
 Initiating supportive therapy 
 Debriding t he wound to eradicate spores and alter conditions for germination 
 Stopping the production of toxin within the wound 
 Neutralizing unbound toxin 
 Controlling disease manifestations 
 Managing complications 
Patients should be admitted to the ICU. Because o f the risk of reflex spasms, a dark and quiet 
environment should be maintained. Unnecessary procedures and manipulations should be avoided. 
Prophylactic intubation should be seriously considered in all patients with moderate -to-severe clinical 
manifestatio ns. 
Metronidazole (eg, 0.5 g every 6 hours) has comparable or better antimicrobial activity. 
Tetanus immune globulin (TIG) is recommended for treatment of tetanus. The World Health 
Organization recommends TIG 500 units by IM injection or intravenously (IV) —depending on the 
available preparation —as soon as possible. 
Benzodiazepines have emerged as the mainstay of symptomatic therapy for tetanus. Diazepam is the 
most frequently studied and used drug; it reduces anxiety, produces sedation, and relaxes muscles. 
Lorazepam is an effective alternative. High dosages of either may be required (up to 600 mg/day). 
Maintenance of adequate nutrition is extremely important. Because of the risk of aspiration, patients 
should not be given any food by mouth. 
Prevention 
Prev ention of tetanus is accomplished through vaccination with DTP or DTaP at the ages of 2 months, 4 
months, 6 months, 12 -18 months, and 4 -6 years. 
Pregnancy is not a contraindication to the use of Tdap in the second and third trimester. 
The following wounds should be considered prone to tetanus: 
 Wounds that have been present for longer than 6 hours 
 Deep (>1 cm) wounds 
 Grossly contaminated wounds 
 Wounds that are exposed to saliva or feces, stellate, or ischemic or infected (including abscesses 
 Avulsions, punctures, or crush injuries 
Tetanus Vaccines and TIG for Wound Management 
Age (years) Vaccination history Clean, minor wounds All other wounds 
0 through 6 Unknown or not up -to-date 
on DTaP series based on 
age DTaP DTaP 
Up-to-date on DTaP series 
based on age No indication No indication 
7 through 10 Unknown or incomplete 
DTaP series Tdap and recommend 
catch -up vaccination Tdap and recommend 
catch -up vaccination 
Completed DTaP series 
AND <5 years since last 
dose No indication No indication 
Completed DTaP series 
AND ≥5 years since last 
dose No indication Td, but Tdap preferred if 
child is 10 years of age 
11 years and older 
(*if pregnant, see footnote) Unknown or <3 doses of 
tetanus toxoid containing 
vaccine Tdap and recommend 
catch -up vaccin ation Tdap and recommend 
catch -up vaccination 
3 or more doses of tetanus 
toxoid containing vaccine 
AND <5 years since last 
dose No indication No indication 
3 or more doses of tetanus 
toxoid containing vaccine 
AND 5 -10 years since last 
dose No indic ation Tdap preferred (if not yet 
received) or Td 
3 or more doses of tetanus 
toxoid containing vaccine 
AND >10 years since last 
dose Tdap preferred (if not yet 
received) or Td Tdap preferred (if not yet 
received) or Td 
Pregnant Women: As part of standar d wound management care to prevent tetanus, a tetanus toxoid – 
containing vaccine might be recommended for wound management in a pregnant woman if 5 years or 
more have elapsed since the previous Td booster. If a Td booster is recommended for a pregnant 
wom an, health -care providers should administer Tdap. 
 LEPTOSPIROSIS 
Leptospirosis is an infectious disease of humans and animals that is caused by pathogenic spirochetes of 
the genus Leptospira . It is considered the most common zoonosis in the worl d. 
Signs and symptoms 
A good clinical history is often the key to accurate diagnosis in leptospirosis. Important features include 
a plausible exposure history and a clinical picture consistent with the disease. 
The exposure history may reveal direct cont act with body fluids or organs of infected animals, or 
indirectly (eg, via contaminated soil or water). 
Leptospirosis occurs as two recognizable clinical syndromes: anicteric and icteric. Anicteric leptospirosis 
is a self -limited, mild flulike illness cha racterized by sudden onset of some combination of the following: 
 Headache 
 Fever (38 -40°C) 
 Muscle pain (typically localized to the calf and lumbar areas) 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Anorexia 
 Diarrhea 
 Pharyngitis 
 Conjunctivitis 
 Nonpruritic ra sh 
Icteric leptospirosis, also known as Weil disease, is a severe illness whose classic manifestations include 
the following: 
 Jaundice 
 Renal failure 
 Hemorrhage 
Laboratory studies used to confirm the diagnosis include the following: 
Culture of leptospires from body fluids or tissue (criterion standard) 
Management 
Transfer to a facility with an appropriate level of care should be considered in patients with severe 
Use of antibiotics in mild leptospirosis is controversial. If u sed, antibiotic treatment may include the 
following: 
 Doxycycline 
 Ampicillin 
 Amoxicillin 
Antibiotics for severe leptospirosis include the following: 
 IV penicillin G (long the drug of choice) 
 Third -generation cephalosporins (cefotaxime and ceftriaxone) 
 Ampicillin or amoxicillin (second -line agents) 
  Erythromycin (in penicillin -allergic pregnant women) 
Patients with severe cases also require supportive therapy and careful management of renal, hepatic, 
hematologic, and central nervous system complications . 
 URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS 
 URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS IN ADULTS 
Urinary tract infections are caused by the presence and multiplication of microorganisms in the urinary 
tract. A urinary tract infection can result in several clinical syndromes, including acute and chronic 
pyelonephritis (infection of the kidney and renal pelvis), cystitis (infection of the bladder), urethritis 
(infection of the urethra), epididymitis (infection of the epididymis) and prostati tis (infection of the 
prostate gland). 
A urinary tract infection is defined by a combination of clinical features and the presence of bacteria in 
the urine. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is the occurrence of bacteria in the urine without causing 
symptoms. When symptoms occur as a result of bacteria this is referred to as symptomatic bacteriuria. 
The incidence of urinary tract infection is highest in young women. Most infections in adult men are 
complicated and related to abnormalities of the urinary tract, altho ugh some can occur spontaneously in 
otherwise healthy young men. Urinary tract infection incidence increases with age for both sexes. 
URINARY TRACT INFECTION IN MALES 
Signs and symptoms 
Dysuria is the most frequent chief complaint in men with UTI. The co mbination of dysuria, urinary 
frequency, and urinary urgency is about 75% predictive for UTI. 
Relevant clinical history includes the following: 
 Previous UTI 
 Nocturia, gross hematuria, any changes in the color and/or consistency of the urine 
 Prostatic enla rgement 
 Urinary tract abnormalities: Personally and within the family 
 Comorbid conditions (eg, diabetes ) 
 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status 
 Immunosuppressive treatments for other conditions (eg, prednisone) 
 Any previous surgeries or instrument ation involving the urinary tract 
Perform a thorough physical examination in males presenting with genitourinary complaints. Focus 
particularly on the patient’s vital signs, kidneys, bladder, prostate, and external genitalia. 
Examination findin gs may include the following: 
 Tachycardia 
 Flank pain/costovertebral angle tenderness 
 Abdominal tenderness in the suprapubic area 
 Scrotal hematoma, hydrocele, masses, or tenderness 
 Penile meatal discharge 
 Prostatic tenderness 
 Inguinal adenopath y 
Consider imaging and urologic intervention in patients with the following: 
 History of kidney stones, especially struvite stones: Potential for urosepsis 
  Diabetes: Susceptibility to emphysematous pyelonephritis and may require immediate 
nephrectomy; di abetic patients may also develop obstruction from necrotic renal papillae that 
are sloughed into the collecting system and obstruct the ureter 
 Polycystic kidneys: Prone to abscess formation 
 Tuberculosis: Prone to developing ureteral strictures, fungus ba lls, and stones 
If concomitant obstructive uropathy is suspected, this is an emergent condition that requires prompt 
intervention. 
Treatment & Management 
As a general rule, all urinary tract infections (UTIs) in men are considered complicated. Therefor e, the 
possibility that infection has ascended to the kidneys must be considered, and treatment regimens must 
assume that infection of the upper urinary tract has occurred. 
Initial inpatient treatment includes the following: 
 Intravenous (IV) antimicrobial therapy with a third -generation cephalosporin (eg, ceftriaxone, 
ceftazidime), a fluoroquinolone (eg, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin) 
 Antipyretics 
 Analgesics 
 IV fluid resuscitation: To restore appropriate circulatory volume and promote adequate urinary 
Consultation with a urologist is essential for the treatment of UTI in adult males with the following: 
 Suspected underlying anatomic abnormality - However, this consultation can be completed on 
an outpatient basis, unless obstructive uropathy is presen t 
 Acute scrotum - Consultation is needed in all but the most clear -cut cases of acute scrotum 
 All forms of prostatitis - In acute bacterial prostatitis, suprapubic drainage may be required if 
acute urinary retention occurs 
The following are suggested co nsultations: 
 Infectious disease specialist - When unusual or resistant microorganisms have been isolated or if 
the infection is in an unusual host 
 Pharmacokinetics specialist - When using aminoglycosides 
CYSTITIS IN FEMALES 
UTI are common in females. 
Signs and symptoms 
Symptoms and signs of UTI in the adult are as follows: 
 Urinary urgency and frequency 
 A sensation of bladder fullness or lower abdominal discomfort 
 Suprapubic tenderness 
  Flank pain and costovertebral angle tenderness (may be present in cystitis but suggest upper 
 Bloody urine 
 Fevers, chills, and malaise (may be noted in patients with cystitis, but more frequently 
associated with upper UTI) 
Diagnostic studies for UTI consist of dipstick, urinalysis, and cultur e. No imaging studies are indicated in 
the routine evaluation of cystitis. 
Current emphasis in the diagnosis of UTI rests with the detection of pyuria, as follows: 
 A positive leukocyte esterase dipstick test suffices in most instances 
 In females with cli nical findings suggestive of UTI, urine microscopy may be indicated even if the 
leukocyte esterase dipstick test is negative 
 Pyuria is most accurately measured by counting leukocytes in unspun fresh urine using a 
hemocytometer chamber; more than 10 white blood cells (WBCs)/mL is abnormal 
Other findings are as follows: 
 Microscopic hematuria is found in about half of cystitis cases 
 Low-grade proteinuria is common 
 A positive nitrate test is highly specific for UTI, but it occurs in only 25% of patients wit h UTI 
Urine culture remains the criterion standard for the diagnosis of UTI. 
Definitions of UTI in women, based on culture results in clean -catch urine specimens, are as follows: 
 Cystitis: More than 1000 colony -forming units (CFU)/mL 
 Pyelonephritis: M ore than 10,000 CFU/mL 
 Asymptomatic bacteriuria: In a female, more than 100,000 CFU/mL in an asymptomatic 
individual 
Management 
Oral therapy with an empirically chosen antibiotic that is effective against gram -negative aerobic 
coliform bacteria (eg, Escherichia coli ) is the principal treatment intervention in patients with cystitis. 
The first -choice agents for treatment of uncomplicated acute cystitis in women include the following: 
 Nitrofurantoin monohydrate (FUROLIN TAB 100MG) 
 Trimethoprim -sulfameth oxazole (TMP -SMX) (BACTRIMEL) 
 Fosfomycin (FOSFOCIN) 
Considerations in antibiotic selection are as follows: 
 Empiric antibiotic selection is determined in part by local resistance patterns 
 Beta -lactam antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin -clavulanate, cefaclor) may be used when other 
recommended agents cannot be used 
 Fosfomycin and nitrofurantoin monohydrate should be avoided in patients with possible early 
pyelonephritis 
 Clinicians may wish to limit use of TMP -SMX, to reduce the emergence of resistant organisms 
Fluoroquinolones ( CIPROFLOXACIN ) are typically reserved for complicated cystitis. 
 Duration of antibiotic treatment for acute, uncomplicated cystitis in women who are not pregnant is as 
 TMP -SMX is given for 3 days 
 Fosfomycin is given in a single do se 
 Nitrofurantoin monohydrate is given for 5 -7 days 
 Beta -lactam agents are given for 3 –7-days 
 For cystitis in older women or infection caused by Staphylococcus saprophyticus , 7 days of 
therapy is suggested 
Hospital admission may be indicated for some patients with complicated UTI. Complicating factors 
include the following: 
 Structural abnormalities (eg, calculi, tract anomalies, indwelling catheter, obstruction) 
 Metabolic disease (eg, diabetes, renal insufficiency) 
 Impaired host defenses (eg, HIV i nfection, current chemotherapy, underlying active cancer) 
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS IN PREGNANCY 
In general, pregnant patients are considered immunocompromised UTI hosts because of the physiologic 
changes associated with pregnancy. 
Oral antibiotics are th e treatment of choice for asymptomatic bacteriuria and cystitis. The standard 
course of treatment for pyelonephritis is hospital admission and intravenous antibiotics. 
UTI is defined as the presence of at least 100,000 organisms per milliliter of urine in an asymptomatic 
patient, or as more than 100 organisms/mL of urine with accompanying pyuria (> 7 white blood cells 
[WBCs]/mL) in a symptomatic patient. A diagnosis of UTI should be supported by a positive culture for a 
uropathogen, particularly in patient s with vague symptoms. UTIs are associated with risks to both the 
fetus and the mother, including pyelonephritis, preterm birth, low birth weight, and increased perinatal 
mortality. 
Acute cystitis involves only the lower urinary tract; it is characterized by inflammation of the bladder as 
a result of bacterial or nonbacterial causes. Signs and symptoms include hematuria, dysuria, suprapubic 
discomfort, frequency, urgency, and nocturia. These symptoms are often difficult to distinguish from 
those due to pre gnancy itself. 
Pyelonephritis is the most common urinary tract complication in pregnant women. Acute pyelonephritis 
is characterized by fever (>38°C), flank pain, and tenderness in addition to significant bacteriuria. Other 
symptoms may include nausea, vo miting, frequency, urgency, and dysuria. 
Treatment & Management 
Treatment of bacteriuria and cystitis 
Because of the dangers of maternal and fetal complications, acute care (eg, in the ED) should focus on 
identifying and treating asymptomatic and symptom atic bacteriuria, along with ensuring that an 
alternate process is not the cause of the symptoms. 
Treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant patients is important because of the increased risk 
of UTI and its associated sequelae. ED care may involve the following: 
  Administration of appropriate antibiotics 
 Administration of fluid if the patient is dehydrated 
 Admission if any indication of complicated UTI exists 
may be used to ensure good hygiene and reduce bacterial contamination of the urethral meatus, 
thereby preventing inadequate treatment and recurrent infection. Behavioral methods include the 
following: 
 Avoid baths 
 Wipe front -to-back after urinating or defecating 
 Wash hands before using the toilet 
 Use washcloths to clean the perineum 
 Use liquid soap to prevent colonization from bar soap 
 Clean the urethral meatus first when bathing 
Antibiotic therapy 
Oral antibiotics are the treatment of choice for asymptomatic bacteriuria and cystitis. Appropriate oral 
regimens include the following: 
Treatment Regimens for Pregnant Women with UTI 
First -line therapy 
 Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/ 100 mg orally twice daily for 5 -7 days or 
 Amoxicillin 500 mg orally twice daily (alternative: 250 mg orally three times daily) for 5 -7 days or 
 Amoxicillin -clavulanate 500/125 mg orally twice daily for 3 -7 days (alternative: 250/125 mg 
orally three times daily for 5 -7 days) 
Second -line therapy 
 Fosfomycin 3 g orally as single dose with 3 -4 oz. of water 
Treatment of pyelonephritis 
The standard course of tre atment for pyelonephritis consists of hospital admission and IV administration 
of cephalosporins or gentamicin. IV fluids must be administered with caution. Antibiotic selection should 
be based on urine culture sensitivities, if known. Often, therapy must be initiated on an empirical basis, 
before culture results are available. 
 PEDIATRIC URINARY TRACT INFECTION 
UTI is one of the most common pediatric infections. 
Febrile infants younger than 2 months constitute an important subs et of children who may present with 
fever without a localizing source. The workup of fever in these infants should always include evaluation 
for UTI. The chart below details a treatment approach for febrile infants younger than 3 months who 
have a temperat ure higher than 38°C. 
Signs and symptoms 
The history and clinical course of a UTI vary with the patient's age and the specific diagnosis. No one 
specific sign or symptom can be used to identify UTI in infants and children. 
Children aged 0 -2 months 
Neonates and infants up to age 2 months who have pyelonephritis usually do not have symptoms 
localized to the urinary tract. UTI is discovered as part of an evaluation for neonatal sepsis. Neonates 
with UTI may display the following symptoms: 
 Jaundice 
 Failure to thrive 
 Poor feeding 
 Vomiting 
  Irritability 
Infants and children aged 2 months to 2 years 
Infants with UTI may display the following symptoms: 
 Poor feeding 
 Vomiting 
 Strong -smelling urine 
 Abdominal pain 
 Irritability 
Children aged 2 -6 years 
Preschoolers with UTI can display the following symptoms: 
 Vomiting 
 Abdominal pain 
 Strong -smelling urine 
 Enuresis 
 Urinary symptoms (dysuria, urgency, frequency) 
Children older than 6 years and adolescents 
School -aged children with UTI ca n display the following symptoms: 
 Vomiting, abdominal pain 
 Flank/back pain 
 Strong -smelling urine 
 Urinary symptoms (dysuria, urgency, frequency) 
 Enuresis 
 Incontinence 
Physical examination findings in pediatric patients with UTI can be summarize d as follows: 
 Costovertebral angle tenderness 
 Abdominal tenderness to palpation 
 Suprapubic tenderness to palpation 
 Palpable bladder 
 Dribbling, poor stream, or straining to void 
Criteria for the diagnosis of UTI in children 2 -24 months are t he presence of pyuria and/or bacteriuria on 
urinalysis and of at least 50,000 colony -forming units (CFU) per mL of a uropathogen from the 
quantitative culture of a properly collected urine specimen. 
Urinalysis alone is not sufficient for diagnosing UTI. Ho wever, urinalysis can help in identifying febrile 
children who should receive antibacterial treatment while culture results from a properly collected urine 
specimen are pending. 
Management 
Patients with a nontoxic appearance may be treated with oral fluid s and antibiotics. Outpatient care is 
reasonable if the following criteria are met: 
 A caregiver with appropriate observational and coping skills 
 Telephone and automobile at home 
  The ability to return to the hospital within 24 hours 
 The patient has no ne ed for oxygen therapy, intravenous fluids, or other inpatient measures 
Hospitalization is necessary for the following patients with UTI: 
 Patients who are toxemic or septic 
 Patients with signs of urinary obstruction or significant underlying disease 
 Patients who are unable to tolerate adequate oral fluids or medications 
 Infants younger than 2 months with febrile UTI (presumed pyelonephritis) 
 All infants younger than 1 month with suspected UTI, even if not febrile 
Treat febrile UTI as pyelonephritis, a nd consider parenteral antibiotics and hospital admission for these 
Antibiotics for parenteral treatment are as follows: 
 Ceftriaxone 
 Cefotaxime 
 Ampicillin 
 Gentamicin 
Patients aged 2 months to 2 years with a first febrile UTI 
If clinical findi ngs indicate that immediate antibiotic therapy is indicated, a urine specimen for urinalysis 
and culture should be obtained before treatment is started. Common choices for empiric oral treatment 
are as follows: 
 A second - or third -generation cephalosporin 
 Amoxicillin/clavulanate, or sulfamethoxazole -trimethoprim (SMZ -TMP) 
Children with cystitis 
 Antibiotic therapy is started on the basis of clinical history and urinalysis results before the 
diagnosis is documented 
 A 4-day course of an oral antibiotic agen t is recommended for the treatment of cystitis 
 Nitrofurantoin can be given for 7 days or for 3 days after obtaining sterile urine 
 If the clinical response is not satisfactory after 2 -3 days, alter therapy on the basis of antibiotic 
susceptibility 
 Sympto matic relief for dysuria consists of increasing fluid intake (to enhance urine dilution and 
output), paracetamol, and NSAID 
Empiric Therapy Regimens 
Empiric therapeutic regimes for pediatric urinary tract infections are provided below based on patient 
See the list below: 
 Cefotaxime 150 mg/kg/day IV/IM divided q6 -8h 
 Ceftriaxone 75 mg/kg/day IV/IM as a single dose or divided q12h (ceftriaxone should not be 
used in infants younger than 6wk) or 
 Ampicillin 100 mg/kg/day IV/IM divided q8h plus gentamicin 3.5 -5 mg/kg/dose IV q24h if 
patient younger than 7d, otherwise gentamicin 5 -7.5 mg/kg/dose IV q24h 
  Transition to oral antibiotic active against the offending organism after 24 -48h for total of 14d 
Age 2mo to 18y 
Outpatient therapy: 
 Nitrof urantoin 5 -7 mg/kg PO divided q6h for 3 -10d or 
o Contraindicated in Children < 3 months of age or when GFR < 50% or in children with 
G6PD deficiency 
o Should not be used in children with symptoms consistent with pyelonephritis as it is 
poorly concentrated in t he bloodstream and has poor tissue penetration or 
 Trimethoprim (TMP) and sulfamethoxazole 6 -12 mg/kg/day PO divided q12h, based on TMP 
component or 
o Contraindicated in children < 6 weeks of age 
 Amoxicillin clavulanic acid - 20-40 mg/kg/day divided q8h or 
 Cefuroxime axetil 20 -30 mg/kg/day divided q12h 
Studies have shown oral antibiotics to be as effective as IV antibiotics in most cases of simple pediatric 
Most children may be treated with oral medications; those deemed “toxic” or are una ble to retain oral 
intake may require parental treatment 
Short -course (3d or 5d) oral antibiotic therapy has been shown to be as effective as 10 -d or 14 -d courses 
for non -febrile UTIs 
For febrile UTIs, the minimum treatment duration should be 7d and may e xtend to 10 -14d 
 PEDIATRIC NEPHROTIC SYNDROME 
Nephrotic syndrome, or nephrosis, is defined by the presence of nephrotic -range proteinuria, edema, 
hyperlipidemia, and hypoalbuminemia. While nephrotic -range protein uria in adults is characterized by 
protein excretion of 3.5 g or more per day, in children it is defined as protein excretion of more than 40 
mg/m2/h or a first -morning urine protein/creatinine of 2 -3 mg/mg creatinine or greater. 
Signs and symptoms 
Pittin g edema is the presenting symptom in about 95% of children with nephrotic syndrome. It is 
typically found in the lower extremities, face and periorbital regions, scrotum or labia, and abdomen 
(ascites). Early on, the edema is intermittent and insidious, an d its presence may not be appreciated. A 
common story is for the child to present to a primary care practitioner repeatedly for periorbital edema, 
which is ascribed to "allergies" until the edema progresses. 
Other signs and symptoms of nephrotic syndrome m ay include the following: 
 Respiratory tract infection - A history of a respiratory tract infection immediately preceding the 
onset of nephrotic syndrome is frequent 
 Allergy - Approximately 30% of children with nephrotic syndrome have a history of allergy 
 Macrohematuria 
 Symptoms of infection - Such as fever, lethargy, irritability, or abdominal pain due to sepsis or 
peritonitis 
 Hypotension and signs of shock - Can be present in children presenting with sepsis 
 Respiratory distress - Due to either massive ascites and thoracic compression or frank 
pulmonary edema, effusions, or both 
 Tachypnea - To compensate for mechanical restriction to breathing 
 Seizure - Due to cerebral thrombosis 
 Anorexia 
 Irritability 
 Abdominal discomfort 
 Diarrhea 
 Hypert ension 
In order to establish the presence of nephrotic syndrome, laboratory tests should confirm the existence 
of (1) nephrotic -range proteinuria, (2) hypoalbuminemia, and (3) hyperlipidemia. Therefore, initial 
laboratory testing should include the following: 
 Urinalysis 
 Urine protein quantification 
 Serum albumin 
 Lipid panel 
The following tests should be performed to determine whether the nephrotic syndrome is idiopathic or 
secondary and, if INS has been determined, whether signs of chronic k idney disease, kidney 
insufficiency, or other signs exclude the possibility of minimal change nephrotic syndrome: 
 Metabolic panel - levels of serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, and ionized calcium, as well 
as of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and cre atinine 
  Testing for HIV 
 Testing for hepatitis B and C 
 Complement studies (C3, C4) 
 ANA, anti –double -stranded DNA antibody (in selected patients) 
Other tests and procedures in selected patients can include the following: 
 Genetic studies 
 Kidney ultrason ography 
 Chest radiography 
 Mantoux test 
 Kidney biopsy 
Management 
Hospitalize the child for initial therapy. 
Corticosteroids 
If kidney biopsy is not initially indicated, a trial of corticosteroids is the first step in the treatment of INS. 
Definition o f nephrotic syndrome: Edema, urine protein: creatinine ratio ≥2000 mg/g; urine protein 
≥300 mg/dL, dipstick urine protein 3+, hypoalbuminemia ≤2.5 mg/L 
Initial treatment: Oral prednisone, starting as a daily dose of 60 mg/m 2/day or 2 mg/kg/day (maximum, 
60 mg/day) for 4 –6 weeks. After 4 –6 weeks, switch to 40 mg/m 2 or 1.5 mg/kg (maximum, 40 mg) on 
alternate days for 2 –5 months with tapering, with a minimum total duration of treatment of 12 weeks 
Loop diuretics, such as furosemide (starting at 1-2 mg/kg/d), may improve edema. Metolazone may be 
beneficial in combination with furosemide for resistant edema. 
Antihypertensive agents 
ACE inhibitors and ARBs can reduce hypertension and may also contribute to reducing proteinuria. 
Calcium channel bloc kers and beta blockers may also be used as first -line agents for hypertension. 
Home monitoring of urine protein and fluid status is an important aspect of management. All patients 
and parents should be trained to monitor first morning urine proteins at ho me with urine dipstick. Urine 
testing at home is also useful in monitoring response (or nonresponse) to steroid treatment. 
 NEPHROLITHIASIS 
Nephrolithiasis specifically refers to calculi in the kidneys, but renal calculi and ureteral calculi 
(ureterolithiasis) are often discussed in conjunction. The majority of renal calculi contain calcium. The 
pain generated by renal colic is primarily caused by dilation, stretching, and spasm because of the acute 
ureteral obstruction. 
Signs and sy mptoms 
The classic presentation for a patient with acute renal colic is the sudden onset of severe pain 
originating in the flank and radiating inferiorly and anteriorly; at least 50% of patients will also have 
nausea and vomiting. Patients with urinary cal culi may report pain, infection, or hematuria. Patients 
with small, nonobstructing stones or those with staghorn calculi may be asymptomatic or experience 
moderate and easily controlled symptoms. 
The location and characteristics of pain in nephrolithiasis include the following: 
 Stones obstructing ureteropelvic junction: Mild to severe deep flank pain without radiation to 
the groin; irritative voiding symptoms (eg, frequency, dysuria); suprapubic pain, urinary 
frequency/urgency, dysuria, stranguria, bowel sy mptoms 
 Stones within ureter: Abrupt, severe, colicky pain in the flank and ipsilateral lower abdomen; 
radiation to testicles or vulvar area; intense nausea with or without vomiting 
 Upper ureteral stones: Radiate to flank or lumbar areas 
 Midureteral calc uli: Radiate anteriorly and caudally 
 Distal ureteral stones: Radiate into groin or testicle (men) or labia majora (women) 
 Stones passed into bladder: Mostly asymptomatic; rarely, positional urinary retention 
The diagnosis of nephrolithiasis i s often made on the basis of clinical symptoms alone, although 
confirmatory tests are usually performed. 
Examination in patients with nephrolithiasis includes the following findings: 
 Dramatic costovertebral angle tenderness; pain can move to upper/lower ab dominal quadrant 
with migration of ureteral stone 
 Generally unremarkable abdominal evaluation: Possibly hypoactive bowel sounds; usually 
absence of peritoneal signs; possibly painful testicles but normal -appearing 
 Constant body positional movements (eg, writhing, pacing) 
 Tachycardia 
 Hypertension 
 Microscopic hematuria 
Laboratory tests in all patients with an acute stone episode: 
 Urinary sediment/dipstick test: To demonstrate blood cells, with a test for bacteriuria (nitrite) 
and urine culture in case of a positive reaction 
 Serum creatinine level: To measure renal function 
Other laboratory tests that may be helpful include the following: 
 CBC with differential in febrile patients 
 Serum electrolyte assessment in vomiting patients (eg, sodium, potassium , calcium, PTH, 
phosphorus) 
  Serum and urinary pH level: May provide insight regarding patient’s renal function and type of 
calculus (eg, calcium oxalate, uric acid, cystine), respectively 
 Microscopic urinalysis 
 24-Hour urine profile 
Non -contrast abdom inopelvic CT scan: The imaging modality of choice for assessment of urinary tract 
disease, especially acute renal colic 
Renal ultrasonography: To determine presence of a renal stone and the presence of hydronephrosis or 
ureteral dilation; used alone or in combination with plain abdominal radiography 
Management 
Supportive care and pharmacotherapy 
Medical treatment of nephrolithiasis involves supportive care and administration of agents, such as the 
following: 
 IV hydration 
 Nonnarcotic analgesics 
 PO/IV na rcotic analgesics 
 Uricosuric agents (eg, allopurinol) 
 Antiemetics (eg, metoclopramide) 
 Antibiotics (eg, ampicillin, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin) 
 Alkalinizing agents (eg, potassium citrate, sodium bicarbonate): For uric aci d and cysteine calculi 
Pain relief 
For patients with ureteral stones that are expected to pass spontaneously, NSAID tablets or 
suppositories (e.g., diclofenac sodium, 100 -150 mg/day, 3 -10 days) may help reduce inflammation and 
risk of recurrent pain. Al though diclofenac can affect renal function in patients with already reduced 
function, it has no effect in patients with normal kidney function. NSAIDs are effective in patients with 
acute stone colic, and have better analgesic efficacy than opioids. Patie nts receiving NSAIDs are less 
likely to require further analgesia in the short term. 
Recommendations for analgesia during renal colic 
1. First choice: start with an NSAID, e.g. diclofenac, indomethacin or ibuprofen. 
2. Second choice: hydromorphine, pentazocine or tramadol. 
3. a-blockers to reduce recurrent colics. 
Morphine is a potent narcotic analgesic that controls severe pain primarily through a CNS mechanism 
via specific receptor site interactions. The usual dosage is 10 mg/70 kg body weight IM every 4 hours. 
The actual dosage required varies according to each individual patient’s tolerance and severity of 
discomfort. 
The obstructed kidney with all signs of UTI is a urological emergency. Urgent decompression is often 
necessary to prevent further complications i n infected hydronephrosis secondary to stone -induced, 
unilateral or bilateral renal obstruction. 
 Hospital admission is clearly necessary when any of the following is present: 
 Oral analgesics are insufficient to manage the pain. 
 Ureteral obstruction from a stone occurs in a solitary or transplanted kidney. 
 Ureteral obstruction from a stone occurs in the presence of a urinary tract infection (UTI), fever, 
sepsis, or pyonephrosis. 
 ACUTE PYELONEPHRITIS 
Acute pyelonephritis is a potentially orga n- and/or life -threatening infection that often leads to renal 
scarring. Acute pyelonephritis results from bacterial invasion of the renal parenchyma. Bacteria usually 
reach the kidney by ascending from the lower urinary tract. Bacteria may also reach the kidney via the 
bloodstream. 
Signs and symptoms 
The classic presentation in patients with acute pyelonephritis is as follows: 
 Fever - This is not always present, but when it is, it is not unusual for the temperature to exceed 
 Costovertebral angle p ain - Pain may be mild, moderate, or severe; flank or costovertebral angle 
tenderness is most commonly unilateral over the involved kidney, although bilateral discomfort 
may be present 
 Nausea and/or vomiting - These vary in frequency and intensity, from a bsent to severe; anorexia 
is common in patients with acute pyelonephritis 
Gross hematuria (hemorrhagic cystitis), unusual in males with pyelonephritis, occurs in 30 -40% of 
females, most often young women, with the disorder. 
Symptoms of acute pyelonephriti s usually develop over hours or over the course of a day but may not 
occur at the same time. If the patient is male, elderly, or a child or has had symptoms for more than 7 
days, the infection should be considered complicated until proven otherwise. 
The cl assic manifestations of acute pyelonephritis observed in adults are often absent in children, 
particularly neonates and infants. In children aged 2 years or younger, the most common signs and 
symptoms of UTI are as follows: 
 Failure to thrive 
 Feeding diffi culty 
 Vomiting 
Elderly patients may present with typical manifestations of pyelonephritis, or they may experience the 
following: 
 Mental status change 
 Decompensation in another organ system 
 Generalized deterioration 
In the outp atient setting, pyelonephritis is usually suggested by a patient’s history and physical 
examination and supported by urinalysis results. 
 When diagnosis suspected, always obtain urine (via clean -catch, mid -stream sample OR 
catheterized specimen) for urinal ysis and culture (with antibiotic susceptibility testing). 
o Urine specimen: should be received in the laboratory within 1 h of collection (or stored 
at 4°C and tested within 18h) to reduce risk of overgrowth of bacteria. 
o Bacterial colony counts typically > 100,000 CFU/mL. 
o Absence of pyuria and bacteriuria suggest an alternative diagnosis (unless obstruction 
  Although blood cultures are positive in 20 –30% of cases, there is little evidence that results 
influence management or outcome. 
 Physical examin ation should include costovertebral angle percussion, abdominal examination, 
and possibly pelvic examination. 
 Pregnancy testing should be performed for all women of child -bearing age. 
Empiric Outpatient 
 Empiric, initial, oral, outpatient treatme nt: if local rates of E. coli fluoroquinolone resistance are 
low (< 10%): 
o Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO twice daily x 7 d 
o Ciprofloxacin extended release 1000 mg PO x 7 d 
o Levofloxacin 750 mg orally x 5 -7 d 
Modify initial treatment based upon results of urine cu lture and sensitivity. 
 While trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole should not be used for initial empiric therapy because of 
high rates of resistance, TMP/SMX 160/800 mg (one DS tablet) PO twice daily x 14 days is 
appropriate treatment of uncomplicated cystitis f or pathogens known to be sensitive. 
 Oral beta -lactams are second -line agents due to high rates of relapse (even when pathogen is 
susceptible). 
Duration: typically 48h parenteral therapy or until afebrile, then switch to oral therapy based upon 
susceptibili ty data to complete 7d (fluoroquinolone) or 14d (TMP -SMX) course. 
 If beta -lactam is used to complete therapy, 10 -14 days duration needed. 
Criteria for hospitalization : can be treated as an outpatient if patient stable. If below factors present, 
consider i npatient treatment. 
 Pregnancy 
 Emesis (inability to reliably keep down oral medications) 
 Sepsis parameters, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) 
 Complicated pyelonephritis infection (including men) 
Complications : renal or perinephric abscess, emph ysematous pyelonephritis, nephronia (focal bacterial 
nephritis), renal papillary necrosis. 
Vaginitis (inflammation of the vagina) is the most common gynecologic condition encountered in the 
office. It is a diagnosis based o n the presence of symptoms of abnormal discharge, vulvovaginal 
discomfort, or both. Cervicitis may also cause a discharge and sometimes occurs with vaginitis. 
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis 
Patients with vaginitis almost always present with a chief complaint of abnormal vaginal discharge. 
Ascertain the following attributes of the discharge: 
 Quantity 
 Duration 
 Consistency 
A diagnosis of Candida vaginitis is suggested clinically by the presence of external dysuria and vulvar 
pruritus, pain, swell ing, and redness. Signs include vulvar edema, fissures, excoriations, and thick curdy 
vaginal discharge. 
Clotrimazole 2% cream 5 g intravaginally daily for 3 days or 
Miconazole 2% cream 5 g intravaginally daily for 7 days or 
Fluconazole 150 mg o rally in a single dose 
Management of Sex Partners 
Uncomplicated VVC is not usually acquired through sexual intercourse; thus, data do not support 
treatment of sex partners. A minority of male sex partners have balanitis, characterized by 
erythematous area s on the glans of the penis in conjunction with pruritus or irritation. These men 
benefit from treatment with topical antifungal agents to relieve symptoms. 
Complicated VVC 
Diagnostic Considerations 
Vaginal cultures should be obtained from women with comp licated VVC to confirm clinical diagnosis and 
identify unusual species, including nonalbicans species, particularly Candida glabrata. 
CERVICITIS 
Two major diagnostic signs characterize cervicitis: 
1) A purulent or mucopurulent endocervical exudate visib le in the endocervical canal or on an 
endocervical swab specimen (commonly referred to as mucopurulent cervicitis) and 
2) Sustained endocervical bleeding easily induced by gentle passage of a cotton swab through the 
cervical os. Either or both signs might be present. Cervicitis frequently is asymptomatic, but some 
women complain of an abnormal vaginal discharge and intermenstrual vaginal bleeding (e.g., after 
sexual intercourse). 
 When an etiologic organism is isolated in the presence of cervicitis, it is typically C. trachomatis or N. 
gonorrhoeae . Cervicitis also can accompany trichomoniasis and genital herpes (especially primary HSV -2 
infection). However, in most cases of cervicitis, no organism is isolated, especially in women at relatively 
low risk for recent acquisition of these STDs (e.g., women aged >30 years). 
Clinical Presentation 
A focused review of symptoms is recommended that asks about the following: 
 Dyspareunia 
 Vaginal discharge 
 Genital skin lesions 
 Abnormal vaginal bleeding 
 Geni tal burning 
 Genital itching 
 Genital malodor 
 Lower abdominal or pelvic pain 
Recommended Regimens for Presumptive Treatment* 
 Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose 
 Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days 
*Consider concurrent treatment for gonococcal infection if patient is at risk for gonorrhea or lives in a community 
where the prevalence of gonorrhea is high . 
Lower abdominal pain (In women) 
A spontaneous complaint of abnorma l vaginal discharge —abnormal in terms of quantity, colour or 
odour —most commonly indicates a vaginal infection or vaginitis . Vaginal discharge due to bacterial 
vaginosis (multiple organisms) or yeast infection ( Candida albicans ) is not sexually transmitted , while 
trichomoniasis ( Trichomonas vaginalis ) usually is. Much less often, vaginal discharge may be the result 
of mucopurulent cervicitis due to gonorrhoea ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) or chlamydia ( Chlamydia 
trachomatis ). 
All women presenting with abnormal v aginal discharge should receive treatment for bacterial vaginosis 
and trichomoniasis. Additional treatment for yeast infection is indicated when clinically apparent (white, 
curd -like discharge, redness of the vulva and vagina, and itching). 
VAGI NAL DISCHARGE (FOR NON -PREGNANT WOMEN) 
Hospitalization of patients with acute pelvic inflammatory disease should be seriously considered when: 
 a surgical emergency, such as appendicitis or ectopic pregnancy, cannot be excluded; 
 a pe lvic abscess is suspected; 
 severe illness precludes management on an outpatient basis; 
 the patient is pregnant; 
 the patient is an adolescent; 
 the patient is unable to follow or tolerate an outpatient regimen; or 
 the patient has failed to respond to outpat ient therapy. 
GENITAL ULCER (FOR BOTH MEN AND WOMEN) 
 DYSFUNCTIONAL UTERINE BLEEDING IN EMERGENCY MEDICINE 
Genital bleeding unrelated to the menstrual period. Abnormal uterine bleeding is a common presenting 
problem in the ED. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is defined as abnormal uterine bleeding in the 
absence of organic disease. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is the most common cause of abnormal 
vaginal bleeding during a woman's reprod uctive years. 
Clinical Presentation 
The amount and frequency of bleeding and the duration of symptoms, as well as the relationship to the 
menstrual cycle, should be established. Ask patients to compare the number of pads or tampons used 
per day in a norma l menstrual cycle to the number used at the time of presentation. The average 
tampon or pad absorbs 20 -30 mL or vaginal effluent. Personal habits vary greatly among women; 
therefore, the number of pads or tampons used is unreliable. The patient should be q uestioned about 
the possibility of pregnancy. 
A reproductive history should always be obtained, including the following: 
 Age of menarche and menstrual history and regularity 
 Last menstrual period (LMP), including flow, duration, and presence of dysmenorrh ea 
 Postcoital bleeding 
 Gravida and para 
 Previous abortion or recent termination of pregnancy 
 Contraceptive use, use of barrier protection, and sexual activity (including vigorous sexual 
activity or trauma) 
 History of sexually transmitted diseases (STD s) or ectopic pregnancy 
Questions about medical history should include the following: 
 Signs and symptoms of anemia or hypovolemia (including fatigue, dizziness, and syncope) 
 Diabetes mellitus 
 Thyroid disease 
 Endocrine problems or pituitary tumors 
 Liver disease 
 Recent illness, psychological stress, excessive exercise, or weight change 
 Medication usage, including exogenous hormones, anticoagulants, aspirin, anticonvulsants, and 
antibiotics 
 Alternative and complementary medicine modalities, such as her bs and supplements 
Patients who are hemodynamically stable require a pelvic speculum, bimanual, and rectovaginal 
examination to define the etiology of vaginal bleeding. A careful physical examination will exclude 
vaginal or rectal sources of bleeding. The examination should look for the following: 
 The vagina should be inspected for signs of trauma, lesions, infection, and foreign bodies. 
 The cervix should be visualized and inspected for lesions, polyps, infection, or intrauterine 
device (IUD). 
 Bleeding from the cervical os 
 A rectovaginal examination should be performed to evaluate the cul -de-sac, posterior wall of 
the uterus, and uterosacral ligaments. 
Patients with severe, acute abnormal uterine bleeding and hemodynamic instability will require urgen t 
gynecologic consultation and hospitalization . 
 Hemodynamically unstable patients with uncontrolled bleeding and signs of significant blood loss should 
have aggressive resuscitation with saline and blood as with other types of hemorrhagic shock. 
 Evaluate A BCs and address the priorities. 
 Initiate 2 large -bore intravenous lines (IVs), oxygen, and cardiac monitor. 
 HEADACHES IN OVER 12S: DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT 
All recommendations apply to adults and young people aged 12 years and over. 
Assessment 
 Evaluate people who present with headache and any of the following features, and consider the 
need for further investigations and/or referral:* 
o worsening headache with fever 
o sudden -onset headache reaching maximum intensity within 5 minutes 
o new -onset neurological de ficit 
o new -onset cognitive dysfunction 
o change in personality 
o impaired level of consciousness 
o recent (typically within the past 3 months) head trauma 
o headache triggered by cough, valsalva (trying to breathe out with nose and mouth 
blocked) or sneeze 
o headache triggered by exercise 
o orthostatic headache (headache that changes with posture) 
o symptoms suggestive of giant cell arteritis 
o symptoms and signs of acute narrow -angle glaucoma 
o a substantial change in the characteristics of their headache 
 Consider further in vestigations and/or referral for people who present with new -onset 
headache and any of the following: 
o compromised immunity, caused, for example, by HIV or immunosuppressive drugs 
o age under 20 years and a history of malignancy 
o a history of malignancy known to metastasise to the brain 
o vomiting without other obvious cause 
 Consider using a headache diary to aid the diagnosis of primary headaches 
 If a headache diary is used, ask the person to record the following for a minimum of 8 weeks: 
o frequency, duration and severity of headaches 
o any associated symptoms 
o all prescribed and over the counter medications taken to relieve headaches 
o possible precipitants 
o relationship of headaches to menstruation 
Cluster headache bout: The duration over which recurrent cluster hea daches occur, usually lasting 
weeks or months. Headaches occur from 1 every other day to 8 times per day 
 Diagnosis of tension -type headache, migraine, and cluster headache 
FEATURE† TENSION -TYPE 
HEADACHE MIGRAINE (WITH OR WITHOUT 
AURA) CLUSTE R HEADACHE 
location Bilateral Unilateral or bilateral Unilateral (around the eye, 
above the eye and along the 
side of the head/face) 
Pain quality Pressing/tightening 
(non -pulsating) Pulsating (throbbing or banging 
in young people aged 12 –17 
years) Variable (can be sharp, boring, 
burning, throbbing or 
tightening) 
intensity Mild or moderate Moderate or severe Severe or very severe 
activities Not aggravated by 
routine activities of daily 
living Aggravated by, or causes 
avoidance of, rou tine activities 
of daily living Restlessness or agitation 
symptoms None Unusual sensitivity to light 
and/or sound or nausea and/or 
Aura (see Migraine with aura in 
main text) 
Symptoms can occur with or 
without headache and: 
 are fully reve rsible 
 develop over at least 5 
 last 5−60 minutes 
Typical aura symptoms include 
visual symptoms such as 
flickering lights, spots or lines 
and/or partial loss of vision; 
sensory symptoms such as 
numbness and/or pins and 
needles; and/or speech 
disturb ance 
 On the same side as the 
 red and/or watery eye 
 nasal congestion and/or 
runny nose 
 swollen eyelid 
 forehead and facial 
 constricted pupil 
and/or drooping eyelid 
Duration of 30 minutes –continuous 4–72 hours in adults 
1–72 ho urs in young people 15–180 minutes 
 Diagnosis of tension -type headache, migraine, and cluster headache 
FEATURE† TENSION -TYPE 
HEADACHE MIGRAINE (WITH OR WITHOUT 
AURA) CLUSTE R HEADACHE 
headache aged 12 –17 years 
headache <15 days 
per month ≥15 days 
months <15 days per 
month ≥15 days per 
month for more 
than 3 months 1 every other 
day to 8 per 
day,‡ with 
remission§ >1 
month 1 every other 
day to 8 per 
day,‡ with a 
continuous 
remission§ <1 
month in a 12 
month period 
Diagnosis Episodic 
headache Chronic 
headacheI Episodic 
migraine (with 
or without 
aura) Chronic 
migraine¶ (with 
or without aura) Episodic 
headache Chronic cluster 
† Headache pain can be felt in the head, face or nec k 
‡ The frequency of recurrent headaches during a cluster headache bout 
§ The pain -free period between cluster headache bouts 
I Chronic migraine and chronic tension -type headache commonly overlap. If there are any features of 
migraine, diagnose chronic mig raine 
¶ NICE has developed technology appraisal guidance on Botulinum toxin type A for the prevention of 
headaches in adults with chronic migraine (headaches on at least 15 days per month of which at least 8 
days are with migraine) 
Tension -type headache, migraine (with or without aura) and cluster headache 
 Diagnose tension -type headache, migraine or cluster headache according to the headache 
features in the table 
Migraine with aura 
 Suspect aura in people who present with or without hea dache and with neurological symptoms 
o are fully reversible and 
o develop gradually, either alone or in succession, over at least 5 minutes and 
o last for 5 –60 minutes 
 Diagnose migraine with aura in people who present with or without headache and with one or 
more of the following typical aura symptoms that meet the criteria (see above): 
o visual symptoms that may be positive (for example, flickering lights, spots or lines) 
and/or negative (for example, partial loss of vision) 
o sensory symptoms that may be posi tive (for example, pins and needles) and/or negative 
(for example, numbness) 
o speech disturbance 
 Consider further investigations and/or referral for people who present with or without migraine 
headache and with any of the following atypical aura symptoms th at meet the criteria (see 
migraine with aura): 
o motor weakness or 
o double vision or 
o visual symptoms affecting only one eye or 
o poor balance or 
o decreased level of consciousness 
Menstrual -related migraine 
 Suspect menstrual -related migraine in women and girls wh ose migraine occurs predominantly 
between 2 days before and 3 days after the start of menstruation in at least 2 out of 3 
consecutive menstrual cycles 
 Diagnose menstrual -related migraine using a headache diary for at least 2 menstrual cycles 
Medication ove ruse headache 
 Be alert to the possibility of medication overuse headache in people whose headache developed 
or worsened while they were taking the following drugs for 3 months or more: 
o triptans, opioids, ergots or combination analgesic medications on 10 da ys per month or 
o paracetamol, aspirin or an NSAID, either alone or in any combination, on 15 days per 
month or more 
Medication 
All headache disorders 
 Consider using a headache diary: 
o to record the frequency, duration and severity of headaches 
o to mo nitor the effectiveness of headache interventions 
o as a basis for discussion with the person about their headache disorder and its impact 
 Consider further investigations and/or referral if a person diagnosed with a headache disorder 
develops any of the feat ures 
  Do not refer people diagnosed with tension -type headache, migraine, cluster headache or 
medication overuse headache for neuroimaging solely for reassurance 
Information and support for people with headache disorders 
 Include the following in discussions with the person with a headache disorder: 
o a positive diagnosis, including an explanation of the diagnosis and reassurance that 
other pathology has been excluded and 
o the options for management and 
o recognition that headache is a valid medical disorder that can have a significant impact 
on the person and their family or carers 
 Give the person written and oral information about headache disorders, including information 
about support organisations 
 Explain the risk of medication overuse headache to people who a re using acute treatments for 
their headache disorder 
Tension -type headache 
Acute treatment 
 Consider aspirin, paracetamol or an NSAID for the acute treatment of tensiontype headache, 
taking into account the person’s preference, comorbidities and risk of ad verse events 
 Do not offer opioids for the acute treatment of tension -type headache 
Prophylactic treatment 
 Consider a course of up to 10 sessions of acupuncture over 5 –8 weeks for the prophylactic 
treatment of chronic tension -type headache 
Migraine with or without aura 
Acute treatment 
 Offer combination therapy with an oral triptan and an NSAID, or an oral triptan and 
paracetamol, for the acute treatment of migraine, taking into account the person’s preference, 
comorbidities and risk of adverse events. 
 For p eople who prefer to take only one drug, consider monotherapy with an oral triptan, NSAID, 
aspirin (900 mg) or paracetamol for the acute treatment of migraine, taking into account the 
person’s preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events 
 When presc ribing a triptan start with the one that has the lowest acquisition cost; if this is 
consistently ineffective, try one or more alternative triptans 
 Consider an anti -emetic in addition to other acute treatment for migraine even in the absence 
of nausea and vomiting 
 Do not offer ergots or opioids for the acute treatment of migraine 
 For people in whom oral preparations (or nasal preparations in young people aged 12 –17 years) 
for the acute treatment of migraine are ineffective or not tolerated: 
o offer a non -oral preparation of metoclopramide 
 Prophylactic treatment 
 Discuss the benefits and risks of prophylactic treatment for migraine with the person, taking into 
account the person’s preference, comorbidities, risk of adverse events and the impact of the 
headache on their quality of life 
 Offer topiramate or propranololIIfor the prophylactic treatment of migraine according to the 
person's preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events. Advise women and girls of 
childbearing potential that topiramate i s associated with a risk of fetal malformations and can 
impair the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. Ensure they are offered suitable 
contraception if needed 
 Consider amitriptyline for the prophylactic treatment of migraine according to the person' s 
preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events 
 Do not offer gabapentin for the prophylactic treatment of migraine 
 If both topiramate and propranolol are unsuitable or ineffective,consider a course of up to 10 
sessions of acupuncture over 5 –8 weeks according to the person's preference, comorbidities 
and risk of adverse events 
 For people who are already having treatment with another form of prophylaxis and whose 
migraine is well controlled, continue the current treatment as required 
 Review the need fo r continuing migraine prophylaxis 6 months after the start of prophylactic 
 Advise people with migraine that riboflavin (400 mg once a day) may be effective in reducing 
migraine frequency and intensity for some people 
Combined hormonal contracepti ve use by women and girls with migraine 
 Do not routinely offer combined hormonal contraceptives for contraception to women and girls 
who have migraine with aura 
Menstrual -related migraine 
 For women and girls with predictable menstrual -related migraine that does not respond 
adequately to standard acute treatment, consider treatment with frovatriptan (2.5 mg twice a 
day) or zolmitriptan (2.5 mg twice or three times a day) on the days migraine is expected 
Treatment of migraine during pregnancy 
 Offer pregnant women paracetamol for the acute treatment of migraine. Consider the use of a 
triptan or an NSAID after discussing the woman’s need for treatment and the risks associated 
with the use of each medication during pregnancy 
 Seek specialist advice if prophylacti c treatment for migraine is needed during pregnancy 
Cluster headache 
Acute treatment 
 Discuss the need for neuroimaging for people with a first bout of cluster headache with a GP 
with a special interest in headache or a neurologist 
 Offer oxygen and/or a sub cutaneous or nasal triptan for the acute treatment of cluster 
 When using oxygen for the acute treatment of cluster headache: 
o use 100% oxygen at a flow rate of at least 12 litres per minute with a non -rebreathing 
mask and a reservoir bag and 
o arran ge provision of home and ambulatory oxygen 
 When using a subcutaneous or nasal triptan, ensure the person is offered an adequate supply of 
triptans calculated according to their history of cluster bouts, based on the manufacturer’s 
maximum daily dose 
  Do not offer paracetamol, NSAIDS, opioids, ergots or oral triptans for the acute treatment of 
cluster headache 
Prophylactic treatment 
 Consider verapamil for prophylactic treatment during a bout of cluster headache. If unfamiliar 
with its use for cluster headache , seek specialist advice before starting verapamil, including 
advice on electrocardiogram monitoring 
 Seek specialist advice for cluster headache that does not respond to verapamil 
 Seek specialist advice if treatment for cluster headache is needed during pr egnancy 
Medication overuse headache 
 Explain to people with medication overuse headache that it is treated by withdrawing overused 
medication 
 Advise people to stop taking all overused acute headache medications for at least 1 month and 
to stop abruptly rath er than gradually 
 Advise people that headache symptoms are likely to get worse in the short term before they 
improve and that there may be associated withdrawal symptoms, and provide them with close 
follow -up and support according to their needs 
 Consider p rophylactic treatment for the underlying primary headache disorder in addition to 
withdrawal of overused medication for people with medication overuse headache 
 Do not routinely offer inpatient withdrawal for medication overuse headache 
 Consider specialist referral and/or inpatient withdrawal of overused medication for people who 
are using strong opioids, or have relevant comorbidities, or in whom previous repeated 
attempts at withdrawal of overused medication have been unsuccessful 
 Review the diagnosis of m edication overuse headache and further management 4 –8 weeks after 
the start of withdrawal of overused medication 
References 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management . Novembe r 
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
Diabetes can be classified into four clinical categories: 
 Type 1 diabetes (due to β-cell destruction, usually leading to absolute insulin deficiency) 
 Type 2 diabetes (due to a progressive insulin secretory defect on th e background of insulin 
resistance) 
 Other specific types of diabetes due to other causes, e.g., genetic defects in β-cell function, 
genetic defects in insulin action, diseases of the exocrine pancreas (such as cystic fibrosis), and 
drug - or chemical -induce d (such as in the treatment of HIV/AIDS or after organ transplantation) 
 GDM (diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy that is not clearly overt diabetes) 
Some patients cannot be clearly classified as type 1 or type 2 diabetic. 
Criteria for the diagnosis of d iabetes 
FPG ≥126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L). Fasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least 8 h.* 
2-h PG≥200 mg/dL (11.1mmol/L) during an OGTT. The test should be performed as described by the 
WHO, using a glucose load containing the equivalent of 75 g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water.* 
A1C ≥6.5% (48 mmol/mol). The test should be performed in a laboratory using a method that is NGSP 
certified and standardized to the DCCT assay.* 
In a patient with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis, a random plasma glucose 
≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L). 
*In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, results should be confirmed by repeat testing. 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus consists of an array of dysfunctions characterized by hyperglycemia and 
resulting fro m the combination of resistance to insulin action, inadequate insulin secretion, and 
excessive or inappropriate glucagon secretion. 
Signs and symptoms 
Many patients with type 2 diabetes are asymptomatic. Clinical manifestations include the following: 
 Classic symptoms: Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss 
 Blurred vision 
 Lower -extremity paresthesias 
 Yeast infections (eg, balanitis in men) 
However, many patients with type 2 diabetes are asymptomatic, and their disease remains undiagnosed 
for many years. 
 Complications 
• Acute Complications 
a) Hypoglycaemia 
b) Hyperglycaemia 
• Chronic Complications 
a) Macrovascular (e.g. cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, peripheral vascular diseases) 
b) Microvascular (e.g. nephropathy, neuropathy and retinop athy) 
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS 
Diabetes management involves lifestyle modification, medications and patient education to encourage 
selfcare and empowerment. 
The overall aims of management are to improve quality of life, reduce complications and prevent 
premature death. Patient and family members should be counselled by identifying and addressing 
concerns which may cause distress thus adversely affecting management. 
Short term: 
• Relief of symptoms and acute complications 
Long term: 
• Achievem ent of appropriate glycaemic levels 
• Reduction of concurrent risk factors 
• Identification and treatment of chronic complications 
Metformin is the preferred initial agent for monotherapy and is a standard part of combination 
treatments. Advanta ges of metformin include the following: 
 Efficacy 
 Absence of weight gain or hypoglycemia 
 Generally low level of side effects 
 High level of patient acceptance 
 Relatively low cost 
The dose of metformin is titrated over 1 -2 months to at least 2000 mg dail y, administered in divided 
doses (during or after meals to reduce gastrointestinal [GI] side effects). Exercise increases metformin 
levels and interferes with its glucose -lowering effect. 
Dual -drug therapy 
If the patient fails to safely achieve or sustain glycemic goals within 2 -3 months, another medication 
should be added. The choice should be guided by patient characteristics (eg, a DPP -4 inhibitor if both 
postprandial and fasting glucose levels are elevated; a GLP -1 agonist if postprandial glucose level s are 
strongly elevated; a TZD if the patient has metabolic syndrome and/or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease) 
 Triple -drug therapy 
If 2 drugs prove unsuccessful after 2 -3 months, the next step is triple therapy. The third drug may be a n 
oral agent from a third class of antidiabetic drugs, basal insulin (typically at bedtime), or the injectable 
drug exenatide. The expense and adverse effect profile of TZDs make their use in an oral triple therapy 
approach less desirable. 
Dietary Modifica tions 
For most patients, the best diet is one consisting of the foods that they are currently eating. Attempts to 
calibrate a precise macronutrient composition of the diet to control diabetes, while time -honored, are 
generally not supported by the research . Caloric restriction is of first importance. After that, individual 
preference is reasonable. 
Modest restriction of saturated fats and simple sugars is also reasonable. 
Weight loss 
Modest weight losses of 5 -10% have been associated with significant impr ovements in cardiovascular 
disease risk factors (ie, decreased HbA1c levels, reduced blood pressure, increase in HDL cholesterol, 
decreased plasma triglycerides) in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Activity Modifications 
Most patients with type 2 d iabetes mellitus can benefit from increased activity. Aerobic exercise 
improves insulin sensitivity and may improve glycemia markedly in some patients. 
Structured exercise training of more than 150 minutes per week is associated with greater HbA1c 
reductio n; however, physical activity helps lower HbA1c only when combined with dietary modifications 
TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS 
Type 1 diabetes is a chronic illness characterized by the body’s inability to produce insulin due to the 
autoimmune destruction of the b eta cells in the pancreas. Onset most often occurs in childhood, but the 
disease can also develop in adults in their late 30s and early 40s. 
Signs and symptoms 
The classic symptoms of type 1 diabetes are as follows: 
 Polyuria 
 Polydipsia 
 Polyphagia 
 Unexp lained weight loss 
Other symptoms may include fatigue, nausea, and blurred vision. 
The onset of symptomatic disease may be sudden. It is not unusual for patients with type 1 diabetes to 
present with diabetic ketoacidosis 
Diagnostic criteria) include the following: 
 A fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level ≥126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L), or 
 A 2-hour plasma glucose level ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) during a 75 -g oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT), or 
 A random plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) in a patient with cl assic symptoms of 
hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis 
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
Monotherapy or with sulfonylurea 
Immediate -release tablet or solution 
 Initial: 500 mg PO q12hr or 850 mg PO qDay with meals; increase q2Weeks 
 Maintenance: 1 500-2550 mg/day PO divided q8 -12hr with meal 
 No more than 2550 mg/day 
Extended -release 
 Glucophage XR: 500 mg PO qDay with dinner; titrate by 500 mg/day qWeek; no more than 2000 
Renal impairment 
 Males: Contraindicated if serum creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL 
 Females: Contraindicated if serum creatinine ≥1.4 mg/dL 
Not for use in patients >80 years unless normal renal function establishedInitial and maintenance dosing 
of metformin should be conservative in patients with advanced age due to the potential for de creased 
renal function in this population 
Immediate -release (10 -16 years) 
 Initial: 500 mg PO q12hr 
 Maintenance: Titrate qWeek by 500 mg; no more than 2000 mg/day in divided doses 
Immediate -release (≥17 years) 
 Initial: 500 mg PO q12hr or 850 mg P O qDay with meals; increase q2Weeks 
 Maintenance: 1500 -2550 mg/day PO divided q8 -12hr with meal 
 No more than 2550 mg/day 
Extended -release (<17 years) 
 Safety and efficacy not established 
Extended -release (≥17 years) 
 Glucophage XR: 500 mg PO qDay with dinner; titrate by 500 mg/day qWeek; not to exceed 2000 
 Fortamet: 500 -1000 mg PO qDay; titrate by 500 mg/day qWeek; not to exceed 2500 mg/day 
Sulfonylureas - Glyburide 
Regular tablets 
 Initial: 2.5 -5 mg PO qDay 
 Maintenance: 1.25 -20 mg PO qDay or q12 hr 
 Not to exceed 20 mg/day 
 Consider administering q12hr for doses >10 mg/day 
Renal impairment: If CrCl <50 mL/min; caution advised 
Initial: 1.25 mg/day if nonmicronized tablets 
Depending on glucose response, may increase dose by no more than 1. 25-2.5 mg (regular) 
Glimepiride 
Initial: 1 -2 mg PO qAM after breakfast or with first meal; may increase dose by 1 -2 mg every 1 -2 weeks; 
not to exceed 8 mg/day 
1 mg PO qDay; titrate dose at weekly intervals to avoid hypoglycemia 
Alpha -Glucosidase Inhibitors -Acarbose 
Initially 25 mg PO q8hr, at meals (with first bite) 
Can increase to 50 or 100 mg PO q8hr at 4 - to 8-wk intervals based on 1 hour postprandial glucose or 
glycosylated hemoglobin levels, and on tolerance 
Maximum Dose 
<60 kg: 50 mg q8hr 
>60 kg: 100 mg q8hr 
Type 2 DM, mono treatment or with sulfonylurea 
Thiazolidinediones - Avandia 
Initial 4 mg PO qDay or divided q12hr 
If inadequate response afer 8 -12 weeks, 8 mg PO qDay or divided q12hr 
Monitor: ALT at start of treatment, qMonth for 12 months then q3Months thereafter 
Coadministration with sulfonylurea: Adjust sulfonylurea dose if hypoglycemia occurs 
Sitagliptin 
100 mg PO qDay 
Renal impairment 
 CrCl >50 mL/min: Dose adjustment not necessary 
 CrCl 30 -50 mL/min: 50 mg PO qDay 
 CrCl <30 mL/min: 25 mg PO qDay 
Gliclazide 
From 30 to 120 mg once daily. 
The recommended starting dose is 30 mg daily 
Rapid -Acting Insulins - Apidra 
Diabetes Mellitus Type I or II 
Indicated to improve glycemic control in adults and children with diabetes mellitu s 
Dosing considerations 
  Equipotent to regular human insulin (ie, elicits same glucose lowering effects on unit per unit 
basis) when administered IV 
 Insulin glulisine has a more rapid onset of action and a shorter duration of action than regular 
human insu lin 
 Dosage must be individualized; blood glucose monitoring is essential in all patients receiving 
insulin therapy 
 Total daily insulin requirement may vary and is usually between 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day 
 Insulin requirements may be altered during stress, major illness, or with changes in exercise, 
meal patterns, or coadministered drugs 
4-17 years: May require 0.8 -1.2 units/kg/day SC during growth spurts; otherwise use adult dosing (0.5 -1 
unit/kg/day) 
Rapid -acting human insulin 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus 
 Approximately one third of the total daily insulin requirements SC; rapid -acting or short -acting, 
premeal insulin should be used to satisfy the remainder of the daily insulin requirements 
 Usual daily maintenance range is 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day in divided doses ; nonobese may require 0.4 -
0.6 unit/kg/day; obese may require 0.8 -1.2 units/kg/day 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus 
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled with oral medication 
 10 units/day SC (or 0.1 -0.2 unit/kg/day) of intermediate - or long -acting insul in given at bedtime 
generally recommended; as an alternative, rapid -acting formulations, such as insulin lispro, 
given before meals have also been used; dose must be adjusted carefully. 
<3 years: Safety and efficacy not established 
≥3 years: May require 0.8 -1.2 units/kg/day SC during growth spurts; otherwise, use adult dosing (0.5 -1 
unit/kg/day) 
Regular insulin (Humulin R, Novolin R) 
 Regular insulin has a rapid onset of action of 0.5 -1 hours and duration of action of 4 -6 hours. The peak 
effects are seen within 2 -4 hours. Preparations that contain a mixture of 70% neutral protamine 
Hagedorn (NPH) and 30% regular human insulin (ie, Novolin 70/30, Humulin 70/30) 
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
Initial: 0.2 -0.4 units/kg/day SC divided q8hr or more frequ ently 
Maintenance: 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day SC divided q8hr or more frequently; in insulin -resistant patients (eg, due 
to obesity), substantially higher daily insulin may be required 
Approximately 50 -75% of the total daily insulin requirements are given as intermediate - or long -acting 
insulin administered in 1 -2 inje ctions; rapid - or short -acting insulin should be used before or at 
mealtimes to satisfy the remainder balance of the total daily insulin requirements 
 Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
Type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled by diet, exercise, or oral medication: Suggested beginning dose 
of 10 units/day SC (or 0.1 -0.2 unit/kg/day) in evening or divided q12hr 
 Give two thirds of daily insulin requirement 
 Ratio of regular insulin to NPH insulin 1:2 
 Give one third of daily insulin requirement 
 Ratio of regular insulin to NPH insulin 1:1 
Severe Hyperglycemia (Diabetic Ketoacidosis) 
0.1 unit/kg IV bolus (some argue against bolus), THEN 
0.1 unit/kg/hr IV continuous infusion; if serum glucose does not fall by 50 mg/dL in the first hour, check 
hydration status; if possible, double the insulin hourly u ntil glucose levels fall at the rate of 50 -75 
mg/dL/hr; decrease infusion to 0.05 -0.1 unit/kg/hour when blood sugar reaches 250 mg/dL 
Hyperkalemia 
5-10 units IV insulin in 50 mL D50W (25 g) infused over 15 -30 min 
Administration 
Administer within 15 minute s before a meal or immediately after a meal 
Making dose adjustments 
 Adjust only 1 insulin dose at a time 
 Correct hypoglycemia first 
 Correct highest blood sugars next 
 If all blood sugars are high (within 2.75 mmol/L [50 mg/dL]): Correct morning fasting bl ood 
glucose first 
 Change insulin doses in small increments: Type 1 diabetes (1 -2 unit change); type 2 diabetes (2 -3 
unit change) 
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
Initial: 0.2 -0.4 unit/kg/day SC divided q8hr or more frequently 
Maintenance: 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day SC divided q8hr or more frequently; in insulin -resistant patients (eg, due 
to obesity), substantially higher daily insulin may be required 
Adolescents: May require up to 1.5 mg/kg/day during puberty 
The average total daily insulin requirement for prepubertal children varies from 0.7 -1 unit/kg/day but 
may be much lower 
Insulin NPH (Humulin N, Novolin N) 
Insulin neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) has an onset of action of 3 -4 hours. The peak effect occurs 
within 8 -14 hours, and its usual duration of action is 16 -24 hours. 
Τype 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
Suggested guidelines for beginning dose 
  Usual daily maintenance range is 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day SC in divided doses; nonobese may require 
0.4-0.6 unit/kg/day; obese may require 0.8 -1.2 units/kg/day 
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
Suggested guidelines for beginning dose: 0.2 uni t/kg/day 
 Give two thirds of daily insulin SC 
 Ratio of regular insulin to NPH insulin 1:2 
 Give one third of daily insulin SC 
 Ratio of regular insulin to NPH insulin 1:1 
Blood glucose adjustments 
 Adjust only 1 insulin dose at a time 
 Correct hypoglycemia first 
 Correct highest blood sugars next 
 If all blood sugars are high (within 2.75 mmol/L [50 mg/dL]): Correct morning fasting blood 
glucose first 
 Change insulin doses in small increments: Type 1 diabetes (1 -2 unit change); type 2 diabetes (2 -3 
unit change) 
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
<12 years: Safety and efficacy not established 
>12 years: Suggested dose is 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day SC; use adult dosing; usual daily maintenance range in 
adolescents is ≤1.2 units/kg/day during growth spurts 
Insulin Glargine (Lantus) 
Insulin glargine has an onset of action of 4 -8 hours and a duration of a ction of 24 hours. Peak effects 
occur within 16 -18 hours. 
Type 1 or 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
Lantus (long -acting) and Toujeo (ultra long -acting) are recombinant human insulin analogues indicated 
to improve glycemic control in adults with type 1 or 2 diabetes me llitus 
Dosing Considerations 
Indicated for once -daily SC administration; exhibits relatively constant glucose -lowering profile over 24 
May be administered at any time during the day; should be administered SC once daily at the same time 
Dose m ust be individualized based on clinical response; blood glucose monitoring is essential in all 
patients receiving insulin therapy 
Patients adjusting the amount or timing of dosage should do so only under medical supervision with 
appropriate glucose monitor ing 
In patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin glargine must be used in regimens with short -acting insulin 
Should not be administered IV or via an insulin pump; IV administration of the usual SC dose could result 
in severe hypoglycemia 
 Initial dose 
 Type 1 diabetes mellitus: Starting dose should be approximately one third of the total daily 
insulin requirements; short -acting, premeal insulin should be used to satisfy the remaining two 
thirds of the daily insulin requirements; insulin glargine should be used in combination with a 
short -acting or rapid -acting insulin; usual daily maintenance range is 0.5 -1 unit/kg/day in divided 
doses; nonobese may require 0.4 -0.6 unit/kg/day; obese may require 0.6 -1.2 units/kg/day 
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus: Starting dose in pa tients who are not currently treated with insulin is 
10 units (or 0.2 unit/kg) once daily 
 Dosage should be individualized under the supervision of a healthcare provider in accordance 
with the needs of the patient and adjusted according to blood glucose mea suremen 
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
Lantus is a long -acting human insulin analogue indicated to improve glycemic control in children with 
type 1 diabetes mellitus; Toujeo is not approved for use in children 
<6 years: Safety and efficacy not establ ished 
≥6 years: Approximately one third of the total daily insulin requirements SC; rapid -acting or short -acting, 
premeal insulin should be used to satisfy the remaining two thirds of the daily insulin requirements; 
usual daily maintenance range in adolesc ents is ≤1.2 units/kg/day during growth spurts 
 DIABETES MELLITUS AND PREGNANCY 
GDM is defined as glucose intolerance of variable degree with onset or first recognition during 
pregnancy. 
Screening for diabetes mellitus during pr egnancy 
Gestational diabetes 
The following 2 -step screening system for gestational diabetes is currently recommended in the United 
 50-g, 1-hour glucose challenge test (GCT) 
 100-g, 3-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) - For patients with an ab normal GCT result 
Type 1 diabetes 
 The disease is typically diagnosed during an episode of hyperglycemia, ketosis, and dehydration 
 It is most commonly diagnosed in childhood or adolescence; the disease is rarely diagnosed 
during pregnancy 
 Patients diagn osed during pregnancy most often present with unexpected coma - Early 
pregnancy may provoke diet and glycemic control instability in patients with occult diabetes 
Type 2 diabetes 
According to the American Diabetes Association’s "Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes --2010," the 
presence of any one of the following criteria supports the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus: 
 Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) = 6.5% 
 Fasting plasma glucose = >126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L ) 
 A 2-hour plasma glucose level = 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) during a 75 -g OGTT 
 A random plasma glucose level = 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/l) in a patient with classic symptoms of 
hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis 
In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, a diagnosis based on any of the first 3 criteria should be 
confirmed by repeat testing on a different day. 
Management 
The goal of dietary therapy is to avoid single large meals and foods with a large percentage of simple 
carbohydrates. The diet sho uld include foods with complex carbohydrates and cellulose, such as whole 
grain breads and legumes. 
The goal of insulin therapy during pregnancy is to achieve glucose profiles similar to those of 
nondiabetic pregnant women. In gestational diabetes , early intervention with insulin or an oral agent is 
key to achieving a good outcome when diet therapy fails to provide adequate glycemic control. 
Glyburide and metformin 
The efficacy and safety of insulin have made it the standard for treatment of diabe tes during pregnancy. 
Diabetic therapy with the oral agents glyburide and metformin, however, has been gaining in popularity. 
Trials have shown these 2 drugs to be effective, and no evidence of harm to the fetus has been found, 
although the potential for l ong-term adverse effects remains a concern. 
 Insulin Therapy 
The goal of insulin therapy during pregnancy is to achieve glucose profiles similar to those of 
nondiabetic pregnant women. Given that healthy pregnant women maintain their postprandial blood 
sugar excursions within a relatively narrow range (70 -120 mg/dL), reproducing this profile requires 
meticulous daily attention by both the patient and clinician. 
Insulins lispro (HUMALOG), aspart (NOVOMIX), regular (HUMALOG), and neutral protamine hagedor n 
(NPH) are well -studied in pregnancy and regarded as safe and effective. Insulin glargine is less well -
studied, and given its long pharmacologic effect, may exacerbate periods of maternal hypoglycemia. 
Insulin detemir (LEVEMIR) is safe and comparable to N PH insulin in pregnancy. 
POSSIBLE COMPLICATIONS OF ABORTION 
 PRELABOUR RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES ( Consider immediate referral or hospitalization ) 
 HYPOTHERMIA 
Hypothermia des cribes a state in which the body's mechanism for temperature regulation is 
overwhelmed in the face of a cold stressor. Hypothermia is classified as accidental or intentional, 
primary or secondary, and by the degree of hypothermia. 
Primary hypothermia is du e to environmental exposure, with no underlying medical condition causing 
disruption of temperature regulation. Secondary hypothermia is low body temperature resulting from a 
medical illness lowering the temperature set -point. 
The body's core temperature i s tightly regulated in the "thermoneutral zone" between 36.5°C and 
37.5°C, outside of which thermoregulatory responses are usually activated. The body maintains a stable 
core temperature through balancing heat production and heat loss 
Hypothermia affects virtually all organ systems. Perhaps the most significant effects are seen in the 
cardiovascular system and the CNS. Hypothermia results in decreased depolarization of cardiac 
pacemaker cells, causing bradycardia. Since this bradycardia is not vagally medi ated, it can be refractory 
to standard therapies such as atropine. Mean arterial pressure and cardiac output decrease, and an ECG 
may show characteristic J or Osborne waves. 
Osborne (J) waves (V3) in a patient with a rectal core temperature of 26.7°C 
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias can result from hypothermia; asystole and ventricular fibrillation have 
been noted to begin spontaneously at core temperatures below 25 -28°C. Hypothermia progressively 
depresses the CNS, decreasing CNS metabolism in a li near fashion as the core temperature drops. At 
core temperatures less than 33°C, brain electrical activity becomes abnormal; between 19°C and 20°C, 
an electroencephalogram (EEG) may appear consistent with brain death. The term "core temperature 
after drop" refers to a further decrease in core temperature and associated clinical deterioration of a 
patient after rewarming has been initiated. The current theory of this documented phenomenon is that 
as peripheral tissues are warmed, vasodilation allows cooler b lood in the extremities to circulate back 
into the body core. 
Very young and elderly persons are at increased risk and may present to the emergency department 
with symptoms that are not clinically obvious or specific for hypothermia, such as altered mental status. 
 Clinical Presentation 
A patient's companions often note initial symptoms in the field. Symptoms can include mood change, 
irritability, poor judgment, and lassitude. Companions may note the patient to demonstrate paradoxical 
undressing (a sever ely hypothermic person removes clothing in response to prolonged cold stress) or 
rhythmic or repeated motions such as rocking. Slurred speech and ataxia may mimic a stroke, alcohol 
intoxication, or high -altitude cerebral edema. Similarly, profound hypother mia may present as coma or 
cardiac arrest. 
A special low -reading thermometer can be used orally or rectally, but it may not reflect a true core 
temperature. Care should be taken not to rely on a temperature from a rectal thermometer lodged in 
stool because an inaccurately low core temperature can be recorded. Obtaining a core temperature may 
help prevent erroneous diagnosis for patients with an altered mental status due to stroke, drug 
overdose, alcohol intoxication, or mental illness. Standard temperature measuring devices commonly 
used for triage may lack the capability to report unusually low temperature; obtain a core temperature 
reading for any patient suspected of being significantly hypothermic. 
Mild hypothermia (32 -35°C) 
Most people shiver vigorously , usually in all extremities. 
As the temperature drops below 34°C, a patient may develop altered judgment, amnesia, and 
dysarthria. Respiratory rate may increase. 
At approximately 33°C, ataxia and apathy may be seen. Patients generally are stable hemodynam ically 
and able to compensate for the symptoms. 
In this temperature range, the following may also be observed: hyperventilation, tachypnea, 
tachycardia, and cold diuresis as renal concentrating ability is compromised. 
Moderate hypothermia (28 -32°C) 
Oxygen consumption decreases, and the CNS depresses further; hypoventilation, hyporeflexia, 
decreased renal flow, and paradoxical undressing may be noted. 
Most patients with temperatures of 32°C or lower present in stupor. 
As the core reaches temperatures of 31° C or below, the body loses its ability to generate heat by 
shivering. 
At 30°C, patients develop a higher risk for arrhythmias. Atrial fibrillation and other atrial and ventricular 
rhythms become more likely. The pulse continues to slow progressively, and c ardiac output is reduced. J 
wave may be seen on ECG in moderate hypothermia. 
Between 28°C and 30°C, pupils may become markedly dilated and minimally responsive to light, a 
condition that can mimic brain death. 
Severe hypothermia (< 28°C) 
At 28°C, the body becomes markedly susceptible to ventricular fibrillation and further depression of 
myocardial contractility. 
Below 27°C, 83% of patients are comatose. 
Pulmonary edema, oliguria, coma, hypotension, rigidity, apnea, pulselessness, areflexia, 
unresponsivenes s, fixed pupils, and decreased or absent activity on EEG are all seen. 
 Medical complications from hypothermia often result and necessitate admission to the hospital in 
moderate and severe hypothermia. Severely hypothermic patients should be admitted to a n intensive 
care unit where their respiratory and cardiac function and temperature may be closely monitored. 
Prehospital Care 
Prehospital management focuses on preventing further heat loss , rewarming the body core 
temperature, and avoiding precipitating ventricular fibrillation or another malignant cardiac rhythm . 
This should be the preeminent concern. Conscious patients can develop ventricular fibrillation suddenly; 
prehospital workers, particularly those operating in remote search -and-rescue operations, should avoid 
inadvertent jerky movement of severely hypothermic patients . Patients who develop hypothermia -
induced dysrhythmia in the field may be beyond resuscitation. 
Patients developing hypothermia from cold -water immersion appear to be at high risk of fibrillation; 
rescuers probably are justified in instructing such patients to minimize motion and to await careful 
extrication. 
RED FLAG - Caution 
Both cardiac pacing and atropine are generally ineffective for bradyarrhythmia. 
Lidocaine is ineffective i n preventing hypothermia -induced ventricular dysrhythmias. 
Cardiac dysrhythmias begin to develop at a core temperature of 30°C. 
Ventricular fibrillation susceptibility is greatest below the core temperature of 22°C. 
To prevent cardiac dysrhythmia with continued hypothermia, rescuers or paramedics should attempt 
rewarming in the field. (A notable exception would be isolated frostbite injury in which limb rewarming 
would preclude self -rescue because of pain.) Note the following: 
 Gently place patients in an environment most favorable to reducing further heat loss from 
evaporation, radiation, conduction, or convection. 
 Remove wet clothing, and replace it with dry blankets or sleeping bags. 
 Initiate active external rewarming with heat packs (eg, hot water bottles, chemical packs) placed 
in the axillae, on the groin, and on the abdomen. 
 Be aware of the risk of causing body surface burns from exuberant active external rewarming. 
 In dire circumstances, rescuers may provide skin -to-skin contact with patients when heat packs 
are unavailable and such therapy would not delay evacuation. 
Ventricular fibrillation in a cold patient is a desperate event. Generally, defibrillation is ineffective at 
hypothermic core temperatures and when equipment for heroic attempts at resuscitation is 
unavailable. In such circumstances followed by extended CPR until rescuers can begin active rewarming 
and perform successful defibrillation. 
Emergency Department Care 
Patients with respiratory failure should be endotracheally intubated and placed on a mechanical 
ventilator. Intubation and insertion of vascular catheters should not be delayed but performed gently 
while closely monitoring cardiac rhythm for ventricular fibrillation. 
 Determine whether a cold patient is profoundly or mildly hypothermic. Profoundly hypothermic patients 
present with stupor or cardiac dysrhythmia (regardless of the recorded temperature) and a core 
temperature of 30°C or lower. Mildly hypothermic patients may be rewarmed in any available manner 
(eg, warm blanket s, removal of cold, wet clothing) since their risk for cardiac dysrhythmia is low. Surface 
rewarming is adequate in these cases, but it is ineffective in very low body temperatures and carries an 
additional risk of temperature after drops and shock seconda ry to peripheral vasodilation. 
Remove any wet clothing, and replace it with warm, dry materials. 
Profound hypothermia is a true emergency, warranting the same resource -intensive resuscitation as 
myocardial infarction. Direct treatment at maintaining or res toring cardiac perfusion; maximizing 
oxygenation is indicated for a prolonged period of time until the core temperature is at least 32°C. 
Do not attempt resuscitation on the patient with a frozen chest where compressions are not possible. 
Gingerly handle p atients identified with profound hypothermia, and take immediate measures to 
prevent degeneration of cardiac activity into malignant dysrhythmia. 
Profoundly hypothermic patients who demonstrate cardiac ectopy may be ideal candidates for 
bretylium, if avail able. Administer an initial dose of 5 mg/kg IV (repeated at 10 mg/kg, as needed) to 
prevent ventricular fibrillation. Lidocaine is ineffective for treatment of hypothermia -induced 
dysrhythmias. 
Initiate warmed, humidified oxygen; provide heated intravenou s saline; and place warmed blankets 
or heat lamps around a hypothermic patient. 
Emergency departments that routinely treat hypothermia can keep blankets and intravenous fluid bags 
in a shared heater. In urgent situations, intravenous fluids that contain n o dextrose or blood can be 
heated in a microwave oven. Once these simple measures have been applied, consider more difficult 
rewarming therapies. 
A patient who is not becoming progressively colder, is conscious, and has a perfusing cardiac rhythm 
may not r equire intensive intervention beyond the methods already discussed. 
Optimal rewarming techniques depend on a patient's condition, the capabilities of providers, and the 
availability of in -hospital care and warming devices. If core body temperature does no t respond to 
warming efforts, underlying infection or endocrine derangements must be considered. 
Slow rewarming methods include IV solutions heated to 45°C (17 kcal/h); heated, humidified oxygen by 
mask (30 kcal/h or 0.7°C/h); warmed blankets (0.9°C/h); an d heated, humidified oxygen via 
endotracheal tube (1.2°C/h). If intact, a patient's endogenous physiologic mechanisms (other than 
shivering) provide similar rates of rewarming (30 kcal/h). 
Moderate rewarming methods provide heat at approximately 3°C/h. Met hods include warmed gastric 
lavage (2.8°C/h), intravenous solutions heated to 65°C (2.9°C/h), and peritoneal lavage with 45°C fluid at 
4 L/h (70 kcal/h or 3°C/h). 
Initiate CPR for hypothermic patients who deteriorate into ventricular fibrillation. These p atients also 
warrant immediate weight -based defibrillation (2 J/kg), along with prompt administration of high -dose 
bretylium (10 mg/kg). 
 RED FLAG - Caution 
A reasonable approach is to initiate resuscitation on all hypothermic patients unless a patien t presents 
with a frozen chest or other obvious nonsurvivable injuries. A patient can be warmed aggressively and 
resuscitated until the core temperature rises above 32°C. At that juncture, if no signs of life are present 
and the patient is not responding t o advanced cardiac life support measures, termination of 
resuscitation may be indicated. 
 EMERGENT MANAGEMENT OF FROSTBITE 
Frostbite is a cold -related injury characterized by freezing of tissue. 
Prehospital Care 
Addre ss life -threatening conditions, such as hypothermia or major trauma, first. Replace wet clothing 
with dry, soft clothing to minimize further heat loss, and initiate rewarming of the affected area as soon 
as possible. However, do not attempt rewarming if th ere is a danger of refreezing. Avoid rubbing the 
affected area with warm hands or snow, as this can cause further injury. If the affected body part is an 
extremity, wrap it in a bulky dressing or blanket for mechanical protection during transport. Also, 
remove jewelry from affected extremities. Oral hydration and administration of ibuprofen may improve 
outcome, if feasible. Avoid alcohol or sedatives, which can enhance heat loss and impair shivering 
Emergency Department Care 
Address life -threatening condit ions first. Fluid resuscitation, especially in persons with mountain 
frostbite, enhances blood flow and tissue perfusion. Rapidly rewarm the affected body part, avoiding 
further trauma. Tetanus prophylaxis should be administered if the patient's vaccinatio n status is not 
current or unknown. 
An appropriate warming technique is the use of a whirlpool bath or tub of water at 38 -40°C. Mild 
antibacterial soap may be added. Avoid warmer temperatures or dry heat because of the risk of thermal 
If a tub is n ot available, use warm, wet packs at the same temperature. 
Administer analgesics, such as morphine sulfate, as needed for pain. Ibuprofen should also be 
administered. 
Debride clear blisters to prevent thromboxane -mediated tissue injury. Leave hemorrhagic b listers intact 
to reduce the risk of infection. Apply topical aloe vera gel every 6 hours with dressing changes. 
RED FLAG - Caution 
The only indication for early surgical intervention is debridement of blisters or necrotic tissue and 
fasciotomy in the ca se of compartment syndrome. 
 HYPERTHERMIA 
Heat illness should be thought of as a spectrum of disease from heat cramps to heatstroke. Medication -
related hyperthermic conditions such as malignant hyperthermia, serotonin syndrome, and neurole ptic 
malignant syndrome (NMS) need to be specifically recognized, as the treatment of these diseases 
requires adjunctive pharmacotherapy. 
Effective thermoregulation, controlled by the hypothalamus, is critical for proper function of the human 
body, with no rmal temperature exhibiting diurnal variation between 36 -37.5°C. 
Hyperthermia is defined as elevated core temperature of greater than 38.5°C 
Patients at risk for heat illness include the following: 
 Athletes exercising strenuously in hot climates 
 Elderly p atients (because of decreased efficacy of thermoregulation, comorbid illness or 
medications, lack of fans or air conditioning, inappropriate dress) 
 Infants and small children (because of high ratio of surface area to weight, inability to control 
fluid int ake) 
 Patients with cardiac disease or those taking beta -blockers (because of inability to increase 
cardiac output sufficiently for vasodilation) 
 Patients who are dehydrated because of poor fluid intake, gastroenteritis, and diuretic or 
alcohol use (Dehyd ration increases demand on ATPase pumps, which contribute 25 -45% of 
basal metabolic rate.) 
 Patients prone to higher endogenous heat production (eg, infection, thyrotoxicosis) 
 Patients taking medications that inhibit sweat production or increase heat pro duction (eg, 
anticholinergics, antidepressants, antihistamines, neuroleptics, zonisamide, sympathomimetics, 
lithium, alpha - and beta -blockers) 
Symptoms of heat exhaustion include the following: 
 Normal to slightly elevated core temperature 
 Fatigue or mal aise 
 Orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia 
 Clinical signs of dehydration 
 Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea (due to splanchnic and renal vasoconstriction) 
 Intact mental status 
 Responsive to cool environment, fluid and electrolyte replacement 
Symptoms of heats troke include the following: 
 Elevated core temperature, usually greater than 40.5°C 
 Vague prodrome of weakness, nausea, vomiting, headache 
 CNS symptoms including confusion, ataxia, coma, seizures, delirium 
 Hot, dry skin 
 Hyperdynamic cardiovascular resp onse (high central venous pressure [CVP], low systemic 
vascular resistance [SVR], tachycardia) 
 Elevation of hepatic transaminases, usually in the tens of thousands range 
 Coagulopathy 
 Rhabdomyolysis and renal failure 
 Noninvasive external cooling 
See the list below: 
 Ice packs 
 Tepid (15°C) water 
 Cooling blanket 
 Ice bath (eg, bathtub, decontamination tub, child’s wading pool) 
 Crystalloid intravenous fluids 
Noninvasive external cooling 
Evaporative cooling 
This is a fast and efficient noninvasive technique for cooling moderate hyperthermia. It was reported in 
volunteers that it reduces core body temperature by approximately 0.3°C per minute; however, in 
heatstroke patients, it reduced core body temperature significantly slower: from 0. 05°C to 0.09°C per 
Remove all of the patient’s clothing. 
Mist over patient constantly , using spray bottles filled with tepid (15°C) water. 
Place large fans to circulate warm room air (ideally 40°C) directed at the patient. 
Whole -body ice packing 
This technique has the advantage of not requiring constant supervision. It can reduce core temperature 
approximately 0.03°C per minute. 
Remove all of the patient’s clothing. 
Position the patient on plastic sheets or in a child’s plastic pool. 
Cover the pati ent’s chest and extremities with crushed ice. 
Remove the patient once core temperature reaches 39°C. 
Strategic ice packing 
This is a commonly used technique, often used in conjunction with evaporative cooling, that reduces 
core temperature approximately 0 .02-0.03°C per minute. 
Remove all of the patient’s clothing. 
Place ice packs in the patient’s groin, in the axillae, and around the anterior neck. 
Remove ice packs once core temperature reaches 39°C. 
RED FLAG - Caution 
Antipyretics are not effective in treating environmental hyperthermia. 
Consider using short -acting benzodiazepines to reduce agitation and shivering during initial cooling as 
well as to treat hyperthermia due to sympathomimetic ingestion. 
Consider a trial of glucose in any patient with alt ered mental status. 
Avoid rapid replacement of free water, as hyponatremia and cerebral edema may develop. 
 MINOR SURGICAL PROCEDURES 
 Superficial and Deep Wounds 
Acute Wound: is the result of tissue damaged b y trauma. This may be deliberate, as in surgical wounds 
of procedures, or be due to accidents caused by blunt force, projectiles, heat, electricity, chemicals or 
friction. An acute wound is by definition expected to progress through the phases of normal he aling, 
resulting in the closure of the wound. 
 Wound infection may be defined as the presence of bacteria or other organisms, which lead to a 
host reaction. A host reaction can present with one or a combination of the following local and 
system ic clinical indicators: 
 Local indicators 
o Redness (erythema or cellulitis) around the wound 
o Increased amounts of exudate 
o Change in exudates colour 
o Malodour 
o Localised pain 
o Localised heat 
o Delayed or abnormal healing 
o Wound breakdown 
 Systemic indicators 
o Increa sed systemic temperature 
o General malaise 
o Increased leucocyte count 
o Lymphangitis 
Wound cleansing 
Requires the application of fluid to clean the wound and optimise the healing environment. 
The goal of wound cleansing is to: 
 Remove visible debris and devita lised tissue 
 Remove dressing residue 
 Remove excessive or dry crusting exudates 
Principles: 
 Use Aseptic Technique procedure 
 Wound cleansing should not be undertaken to remove 'normal' exudate 
 Cleansing should be performed in a way that minimises trauma to the wound 
 Wounds are best cleansed with sterile isotonic saline or water 
 The less we disturb a wound during dressing changes the lower the interference to healing 
 Fluids should be warmed to 37°C to support cellular activity 
 Skin and wound cleansers should have a neutral pH and be non -toxic 
 Avoid alkaline soap on intact skin as the skin pH is altered, resistance to bacteria decreases 
 Avoid delipidising agents as alcohol or acetone as tissue is degraded 
 Antiseptics are not routinely recommended for cleansing and should only be used sparingly for 
infected wounds 
Wash Your Hands 
• Rub hands with soap and water for 15 to 30 seconds. 
• Be sure to wash between fingers and under your nails. 
• Rinse well and dry thoroughly. 
GET YOUR SUPPLIES 
• Have everything you n eed ready before you begin 
Wash/Irrigate the Wound (Sore) 
• Always follow your doctor’s instructions for your wound care. 
• If you are instructed to use a syringe with a solution, your nurse will show you how to use this device. 
• To clean the open wound, pour enough solution to dampen the gauze, and then wipe your wound 
using circular motions from the center of the wound outward. Be sure to clean at least 1cm beyond the 
wound margins. 
• Make sure you use a new gauze each time you wipe and discard the soil ed one in a plastic bag. 
• Dry surrounding skin by patting with new gauze. 
Are there likely to be other injuries? (eg. head / cervical spine in falls, eye in facial trauma or teeth with 
mouth injuries). 
Is the wound likely to be contaminated by dirt or f oreign bodies? 
Is there injury to deeper structures (eg. tendons, nerves)? In the face, remember facial nerve, parotid 
/lacrimal ducts, medial canthus of the eye. If a deep laceration cannot be examined adequately to 
exclude damage to such structures, gen eral anaesthesia may be required. 
Is blood supply impaired? If a flap or area of soft tissue distal to the laceration appears dusky or poorly 
perfused, the wound requires specialist assessment. Areas with end -arteriolar supply (extremities such 
as the tip of the nose, finger tips, and ear lobes) require special care. Do not use local anaesthesia with 
adrenaline on such wounds. 
Adequate anaesthesia is necessary for complete examination, cleansing and repair of wounds. 
1. Topical anaesthesia 
ALA (adrenaline/l ignocaine) 0.1 ml/kg. 
EMLA or AnGel applied to the wound (most effective on limb wounds) 
2. Local anaesthesia 
eg. 1% lignocaine with adrenaline slowly infiltrated into the wound, (care should be taken not to 
use adrenaline on finger tips) 
3. Regional block 
eg. infiltrate nerve proximal to injury (ring block digits - use plain lignocaine, no adrenaline) 
Nitrous oxide may facilitate a more comfortable injection. 
Tissue adhesive ("Dermabond glue") 
 Can be used on wounds which have clean edges, do not require dee p sutures and are not under 
 Best for wounds of less than 3cm in length with edges easily held together. 
  Do not use on mucosal surfaces. 
 If glueing the forehead or in the vicinity of the eye, the eye should be padded to avoid any glue 
dripping i nto the eye or onto the eyelashes. 
 Oppose the edges of the wound and apply very small amount of glue to the surface, holding the 
edges together for 30 secs. 
 Do not allow glue to enter wound itself (non -absorbable - acts as foreign body). Generates heat 
(may be uncomfortable if applied too thickly). 
 Care should be taken not to apply too much tissue glue and to avoid placement over currently 
bleeding wounds as the polymerisation is exothermic and the patient will notice a heat 
sensation. The tensile strengt h of the bond will be reduced also. 
 Does not require removal; comes off in 1 -2 weeks. 
Adhesive strips ("Steristrips") 
 May be adequate in simple lacerations which require opposition of slightly separated wound 
 They do not remain in place for lon g periods, and should not be used if there is movement or 
tension across the wound. 
 Prepare skin with tincture of benzoic compound to aid adhesion. 
 Place strips with sufficient space between each to allow drainage of fluid from the wound to 
avoid infecti on. 
 Keep dry for 72 hours. 
NB: Young or anxious children will require sedation prior to wound repair 
 Bleeding may be profuse, but usually ceases with firm digital pressure along the margins of 
wound. Comb hair out of wound (vaseline oft en helps). It is not usually necessary to shave much 
 Close in 2 layers: 
 GALEA 3/0 -5/0 Chromic Cat Gut (CCG) or PDS (absorbable) 
 SCALP 4/0 -5/0 Nylon (Removal of sutures [ROS] ~7 days) 
 Minimal debridement. Do not shave eyebrow 
 Superficia l scratches should be cleaned only and left to epithelialise (± steristrips) 
 Sutures 5/0, 6/0 Nylon (ROS 5 -7 days) or Fast gut or Vicryl absorbable sutures 
 Check for fractures (zygoma, blow out of orbit) and involvement of facial nerve and muscle . 
 Ophthalmology opinion if hyphaema or "closed eye with swelling". 
 Close as for forehead 
 If involving the lid margin then refer to Ophthalmology. 
 Look for tarsal plate involvement - refer Ophthalmology 
 Simple lacerations can be glued or sutured under low tension. Use 6/0 Vicryl or Fast Gut 
absorbable sutures. 
 Superficial lacerations can be closed in Emergency by person with appropriate experience if the 
child is cooperative. Otherwise will need GA and Plastic surgical repair. 
 NB: Need ac curate approximation of vermilion border and skin. Sutures: skin - 6/0 Nylon (ROS 5 
days) or Fast Gut (absorbable); mucosa and muscle - 4/0 CCG, Vicryl 
 Lacerations of the inner lip rarely need any intervention. 
 Lacerations of the gum margin (e.g. deglovin g injury) need referral to Dental or Facio -Maxillary. 
 Immobilise area of laceration and joint above and below, following repair eg. plaster slab or sling. 
 Upper Limbs: May require arterial tourniquet control. 4/0, 5/0 Nylon. Deep sutures 4/0 PDS. 
 Lower Limbs: Debridement important. Do not close if under undue tension especially pretibial, 
 ROS 7 -10 days. 
 Debridement can be more generous. Fat layer: 3/0 PDS. Skin: 4/0, 5/0 Nylon. ROS 10 -14 days. 
Digits & Hand 
 Subungual Haematoma: 
 Usually caused by blunt trauma to the finger tip. 
 If < 50% of nail bed - treat with ice and analgesia only 
 If > 50% and significant pain - then burn hole in nail to relieve the pressure 
 Small lacerations of finger tips with skin loss are very common. 
 Areas of skin loss up to 1 cm2 are treated with dressings and heal with good return of sensation. 
Any greater degree of tissue loss should be referred for plastic surgical opinion. 
 Partial -amputation / crush injury. 
 Need to assess the integrity of the nail be d - if damaged needs plastic surgery repair. X -ray to look 
for fracture of distal phalynx. A fracture implies damage to the nail bed. Discuss management with 
 Be careful in assessing wound especially in very young children as deeper structu res (eg nerves 
and tendons) may be involved. If in doubt consult Plastics. 
 Compound injuries (i.e. fracture and laceration) should have antibiotic cover. 
Antibiotics 
Antibiotics are not indicated for simple lacerations. They are usually given for bite s and wounds with 
extensive tissue damage, or massive contamination, but are secondary in importance to the initial 
decontamination of the wound. Recommended antibiotics augmentin for 5 days. 
Burn Depth 
Burned patients' survival is related to the following factors: burn size/depth, age, presence of inhalation 
injury, and patient comorbidity. Depth of burn injury is usually classified according to degrees. 
First -degree burns 
In first -degree burns, minor epithelial damage of the epidermis exists. R edness, tenderness, and pain are 
the hallmarks of this injury. Blistering does not occur, and 2 -point discrimination remains intact. 
Second -degree burns 
Superficial partial -thickness and deep partial -thickness burns are the 2 types of second -degree burns. In 
these burn injuries, some portion of the skin appendages remains viable, allowing epithelial repair of the 
burn wound without skin grafting. Superficial partial -thickness burn involves the epidermis and 
superficial (papillary) dermis, often resulting i n thin -walled, fluid -filled blisters. These burns appear pink, 
moist, and soft and are exquisitely tender when touched by a gloved hand. They heal in approximately 
2-3 weeks. 
Third -degree burns 
Third -degree burns are full -thickness burns that destroy both epidermis and dermis. The capillary 
network of the dermis is completely destroyed. Burned skin has a white or leathery appearance with 
underlying clotted vessels and is anesthetic. Unless a third -degree burn is small enough to heal by 
contraction (< 1 cm) , skin grafting always is necessary to resurface the injured area. Immersion scalds, 
flame burns, and chemical and high -voltage electrical injuries cause third -degree burns. 
Fourth -degree burns 
Fourth -degree burns cause full -thickness destruction of the s kin and subcutaneous tissue, with 
involvement of the underlying fascia, muscle, bone, or other structures. These injuries require extensive 
debridement and complex reconstruction of specialized tissues and invariably result in prolonged 
disability. Fourth -degree burns result from prolonged exposure to the usual causes of third -degree 
Severity of burn injury depends on 
(1) extent, depth, and location of burn injury; 
(2) age of patient; 
(3) etiologic agents involved; 
(4) presence of inhalation inj ury; and 
(5) coexisting injuries or preexisting illnesses. 
 Prehospital care 
Remove the person from the source of the burn without endangering rescue personnel. After 
extrication, initial care of the burn victim should follow the basic principles o f trauma resuscitation (ie, 
airway, breathing, and circulation [ABCs]), as follows: 
 Perform a rapid primary survey and immediately correct any problems found 
 Remove any constricting clothing and jewelry 
 When ventilatory and circulatory competence have be en restored, perform a secondary survey 
 Concurrently with airway and circulatory management, make an effort to stop the burning 
Airway and breathing support 
 Administer humidified oxygen via a nonrebreathing reservoir mask or endotracheal tube at a 
rate of 10 -12 L/min if signs of inhalation injury are present 
 A patient who is not breathing should be intubated and ventilated with 100% oxygen. 
Treatment of burn shock 
 Elevate the patient’s legs 12 in. off the ground and administer humidified oxygen 
 Administer IV fluid if transport time will be longer than 30 min and fluid resuscitation is 
Fluid resuscitation 
 Begin resuscitation immediately with warmed fluid if possible 
 The arm is the preferred site for cannulation 
 Catheters may be plac ed through burned skin if unburned skin is unavailable 
 If IV access is not possible, consider interosseous access methods 
 Fluid resuscitation is not recommended for children at the scene of the accident 
 In adults, administer lactated Ringer solution or normal saline without glucose 
 IV flow rates are determined according to the patient’s clinical status 
Cooling of burned tissue 
 Remove charred clothing 
 Immerse the burn wound in cold (1 -5°C) water for about 30 minutes if transport cannot be 
undertaken im mediately 
 Do not use ice water or apply ice directly to the burn wound 
 Local cooling of burns of less than 9% of TBSA can be continued longer than 30 min to relieve 
 Minor burns can be cooled with running tap water and dressed after more life -threat ening 
issues have been addressed 
Transfer to burn center 
 If the vehicle with advanced life support capability can transport the burn patient to a 
specialized burn treatment facility within 30 minutes, the patient should be taken directly to this 
 If the transport time to the specialized burn treatment facility is longer than 30 minutes, the 
patient should be transported instead to the nearest ED with advanced life support capability 
 Calculation of fluid needs 
All patients with a major burn i njury must receive fluid resuscitation that is influenced by the percentage 
of the TBSA covered by the burn, as well as by the presence of inhalation injury. Adequate resuscitation 
is evidenced by a normal sensorium, stable vital signs, and a normal urinar y output, as follows: 
 Children younger than 2 years: 1 mL/lb/h 
 Older children: 0.5 mL/lb/h 
 Adults: ≥ 30 -40 mL/h 
Criteria for transfer to a burn center 
 Any partial -thickness burn larger than 20% of total body surface area (TBSA) in a patient of any 
age or larger than 10% of TBSA in children younger than 10 years or adults older than 50 years 
 Third -degree burns covering more than 5% of TBSA 
 Second -degree or third -degree burns involving critical areas (eg, hands, feet, face, perineum, 
genitalia, or major joints) 
 Burns with associated inhalation injury 
 Electrical or lightning burns 
 Severe burns complicated by coexisting trauma - If traumatic injuries pose a higher risk to the 
patient than the burn injuries, the patient may have to be sent first to a tra uma center 
 Preexisting disease that could complicate management of the burn injury 
 Chemical burns with threat of cosmetic or functional compromise 
 Circumferential burns on the extremities or the chest 
Pain relief 
Immediate, effective an algesia should be provided 
 MENTAL/PSYCHICAL DISORDERS 
Anxiety disorders are common psychiatric disorders. 
Anxiety disorders appear to be caused by an interaction of biopsychosocial factors, inc luding genetic 
vulnerability, which interact with situations, stress, or trauma to produce clinically significant 
syndromes. 
Panic disorder 
Patients with panic disorder frequently present to the ED with chest pain or dyspnea, fearing that they 
are dying o f myocardial infarction. They typically report a spontaneous sudden onset of fear or 
discomfort, typically reaching a peak within 10 minutes. Attacks are associated with a constellation of 
systemic symptoms, including the following: 
 Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate 
 Sweating 
 Trembling or shaking 
 Shortness of breath or feeling of smothering 
 Choking sensation 
 Chest pain or discomfort 
 Nausea or abdominal distress 
 Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint 
 Derealization (ie, fe eling of unreality) or depersonalization (ie, being detached from oneself) 
 Fear of losing control or going crazy 
 Fear of dying 
 Paresthesias (ie, numbness or tingling sensations) 
 Chills or hot flashes 
During the episode, patients have the urge to flee or escape and have a sense of impending doom (as 
though they are dying from a heart attack or suffocation). Other symptoms may include headache, cold 
hands, diarrhea, insomnia, fatigue, intrusive thoughts, and ruminations. 
Generalized anxiety disorder 
This disorder is characterized by excessive anxiety and worry. Worrying is difficult to control. Anxiety 
and worry are associated with at least 3 of the following symptoms: 
 Restlessness or feeling keyed -up or on edge 
 Being easily fatigued 
 Difficulty concent rating or mind going blank 
 Irritability 
 Muscle tension 
 Sleep disturbance 
 Although not a diagnostic feature, suicidal ideation and completed suicide have been associated 
with generalized anxiety disorder 
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) 
A perso n with social phobia will typically report a marked and persistent fear of social or performance 
situations, to the extent that his or her ability to function at work or in school is impaired. Exposure to 
social or performance situation always produces anx iety. Social or performance situations are avoided 
 or endured with intense anxiety. Avoidance behavior, anticipation, or distress in the feared social or 
performance setting produces significant impairment in functioning. 
Agoraphobia 
Inquire about any int ense anxiety reactions that occur when the patient is exposed to specific situations 
such as heights, animals, small spaces, or storms. Other areas of inquiry should include fear of being 
trapped without escape (eg, being outside the home and alone; in a c rowd of unfamiliar people; on a 
bridge, in a tunnel, in a moving vehicle). 
Specific (simple) phobia 
If specific phobias are suspected, specific questions need to be asked about irrational and out of 
proportion fear to specific situations (eg, animals, ins ects, blood, needles, flying, heights). Phobias can 
be disabling and cause severe emotional distress, leading to other anxiety disorders, depression, suicidal 
ideation, and substance -related disorders, especially alcohol abuse or dependence. 
Treatment & M anagement 
Treatment usually consists of a combination of pharmacotherapy and/or psychotherapy. 
The outcome of treatment is determined by several factors, including the following: 
 Severity of diagnosis 
 level of functioning prior to onset of symptoms 
 Degr ee of motivation for treatment 
 Level of support (eg, family, friends, work, school) 
 Ability to comply with medication and/or psychotherapeutic regimen 
Acute anxiety 
Patients with significant discomfort from their anxiety can benefit from emergency anxi olytic treatment, 
primarily with a benzodiazepine. In addition to ED treatment, patients in an acute anxious state of such 
severity that they pose a danger to themselves or to others should have a psychiatric consultation. 
Indications for hospitalization include the following 
 Severe functional impairment (cannot meet own daily needs) 
 Suicide or homicide risk 
 Social skills deficits (eg, the person is so preoccupied that he or she is unaware that his or her 
actions and behaviors have the potential to provo ke others to cause harm) 
Alprazolam (Xanax) 
For management of anxiety attacks. Binds receptors at several sites within the central nervous system, 
including the limbic system and reticular formation. 
0.25 -0.5 mg PO q6 -8hr; titrate to effect q3 -4Days; not to exceed 4 mg/day 
Panic Disorder 
 0.5 mg PO q8hr; may increase q3 -4Days by ≤1 mg/day 
 Average dose: 5 -6 mg/day PO 
 Anxiety Associated With Depression 
1-4 mg/day PO divided q8hr 
Modulates postsynaptic effects of GABA -A transmission, resulting in an increase in presynaptic 
inhibition. Appears to act on part of the limbic system, the thalamus, and hypothalamus, to induce a 
calming effect. Also has been found to be an effective adjunct for the relief of skeletal muscle spasm 
caused by upper motor neuron disorders. 
2-10 mg PO q6 -12hr, OR 2 -10 mg IV/IM q6 -12hr; no more than 30 mg/8 hours 
Insomnia is defined as repeated difficulty with sleep initiation, maintenance, consolidation, or quality 
that occurs despite adequate time and opportunity for sleep and that results in some form of daytime 
impairment. 
A social history should be obtained, addressing the following: 
 Transient or short -term insomnia: Recent situational stresses 
 Chronic insomnia: Past stresses or medical illnesses 
 Use of tobacco, caffeinat ed products, alcohol, and illegal drugs 
The medication history should be reviewed, focusing on agents that commonly cause insomnia, such as 
the following: 
 Beta blockers 
 Clonidine 
 Theophylline (acutely) 
 Certain antidepressants (eg, protriptyline, fluoxe tine) 
 Decongestants 
 Stimulants 
 Over -the-counter and herbal remedies 
Sedative -hypnotics are the most commonly prescribed drugs for insomnia. Though not usually curative, 
they can provide symptomatic relief when used alone or adjunctively. Such agents i nclude the following: 
 Short - and intermediate -acting benzodiazepines (eg, triazolam, temazepam) 
 Zolpidem 
The following general precautions should be taken when sedative -hypnotics are used: 
 Start with a low dose, and maintain at the lowest effective dose 
 Avoid continued nightly use; encourage patients to use them only when truly necessary 
 Avoid using for more than 2 -4 weeks if possible 
 Counsel patients to allow for at least 8 hours of sleep 
 Be aware that impairment can be present despite a feeling of being fully awake 
 When the problem is falling asleep, prefer hypnotics with a rapid onset of action (zolpidem) 
 When the problem is staying asleep, consider a hypnotic with a slower rate of elimination (eg, 
temazepam) 
 If the patient is depressed, conside r an antidepressant with sedative properties (eg, trazodone, 
mirtazapine, amitriptyline) in preference to a hypnotic 
 Never use hypnotics with alcohol 
 Avoid using in pregnant patients 
 Avoid using benzodiazepines in patients with known or possible sleep a pnea 
 Use lower doses in elderly patients 
 AGITATED PATIENT 
Agitation is defined as an abnormal increase in psychological or motor hyperactivity. 
All emergency medicine personnel need to be aware of the signs and symptoms of potential violence. 
Any patient can become violent, but patients with organic disorders such as dementia, delirium, and 
chemical intoxication have a higher incidence of violence, as do functional disorders such as mania and 
schizophrenia. The following is a list of “early warnin g signs” of violence: 
1. Patient exhibits or threatens violence. 
2. Patient makes ED staff anxious or fearful. 
3. Behavior alternates between shouting and dozing, and between cooperation and belligerence. 
4. Patient expresses fear of losing control. 
5. Patient is uncooperative, hostile, agitated and unable to sit still. 
6. Patient is intoxicated with alcohol or other chemicals or withdrawing from drugs. 
7. Patient has a past history of violence. He is a “Frequent flyer” known to police or ED staff for violence 
or impulsive behavior. 
8. Patient has tense, rigid posture, is easily startled and suspicious. 
Primary Survey 
 Appearance 
 Current medical status 
 Psychiatric History (history of violence) 
 Current medication 
 Oriented (time, place, person) 
Physiolog ical indications for impending aggression 
 Flushing of skin 
 Dilated pupils 
 Shallow rapid respirations 
 Excessive perspiration 
Many patients who become violent are fortunately not violent from the moment they come through the 
door. This allows the staff to p repare but it also allows for alternative measures to restraints to be 
employed. A doctrine called “the least restrictive method of restraint” should be employed when 
dealing with the potentially violent patient. This means that a patient should be provide d alternatives to 
correct inappropriate behavior in order to maintain a good working doctor/patient relationship and to 
maintain the dignity of the patient. 
These methods of “talking a patient down” include: 
1. Avoid eye contact with patient. 
2. Do not block exits and leave the door to the exam room open. 
3. Maintain a good distance from potentially violent patient; do not invade the patient’s “space”. 
4. Adopt passive, non -confrontational posture and attitude, and allow patient to ventilate his feelin gs. 
Develop a therapeutic alliance with the patient. 
5. Treat the patient as you expect him to behave. 
6. Offer the patient food or drink. 
7. Do not make challenging, provocative, or belligerent remarks. 
 8. If the patient acts out, tell the patient dir ectly “your behavior is frightening others and we cannot 
allow such behavior”. 
9. Do not turn your back on potentially violent patient. 10. Never underestimate the potential for 
Once the use of less restrictive methods of modifying the patient’ s behavior, such as “talking them 
down” have failed then the use of restraints may become necessary. The doctrine of “the least 
restrictive method of restraint” applies here as well. Providing the patient with options for modifying 
his/her behavior allows a patient/doctor relationship to be maintained. A patient may choose one 
method of restraint over another. If it is not possible to engage the patient, and have him/her 
participate in their treatment, and the situation presents a risk of injury to the pati ent or staff then it 
becomes necessary to use force to restrain the patient. This should be done with a team approach that 
is well rehearsed, in which all the participants understand their role. This can be done in the following 
manner: Placing 4 -5 securit y officers in clear view of the patient, but 10 -15 feet distant. The ED 
physician should then notify the patient in a firm, but not threatening voice, that the continuation of the 
patient’s uncontrolled and disruptive behavior will not be allowed, and that the patient will be 
restrained by “the team” unless he lies down now on the ED cart and cooperates with the medical staff. 
Physical restraints should be used if, in the ED physician’s medical opinion, the patient is a danger to 
themselves, other patients or the staff. Also, the ED physician can use “good faith” restraints to allow 
evaluation and treatment of an uncooperative incompetent patient (such as a patient with dementia). If 
physical restraints are to be used, they should be used properly and restr aints must be adequate. 
The order in which restraints are used does not need to be physical and then chemical. If the patient is 
willing to take medication prior to the use of physical restraints then give him/her the medication. Often 
patient just want t o get back on their medications in order to feel better (stop the voices) and so will 
take medication with better cooperation than physical restraints. Chemical restraints can also be used 
after physical restraints if the patient continues to struggle agai nst the restraints and shows a 
persistence of uncontrolled behavior. 
 Remember you are generally treating the undifferentiated patient, with limited access to past 
medical history. 
 These patients are generally reluctant to take oral medications, IV access needs to be obtained, 
or IM or SL sedation can be given while attempting IV canulation, 
 Once you choose to start chemical sedation, you have full responsibility to maintain the 
patient’s airway, breathing, circulation, provide bladder care, hydra tion, and general nursing 
care to that patient. 
 Benzodiazepines are preferred in the ED, as have prompt onset of action, and a good safety 
 Antipsychotic”s have a role when patient is not responding to benzodiazepines, and as an 
adjunct to the benz o’s to achieve sedation. 
Midazolam: 
 Start with 2.5 -5mg IV or IM increments and work upwards 
 Short acting medication that provides rapid sedation, in titrated doses 
 Maximum effect in 10mins, and last up to 2 hours. 
 Start with 5 -10 PO or IV increme nts and work upward 
 Longer acting than Midazolam, works well for managing withdrawal symptoms 
 IV administration causes short lived stinging sensation, do not dilute dose to prevent this 
Lorazepam: 
 1-2mg PO 
 Patient needs to be willy to take oral medication 
 Provides sedation up to 4 -6 hours 
Antipsychotics: 
Olanzapine: 
 Start with 5 -10mg PO or SL, or 10mg IM 
 Newer atypical antipsychotic 
 Risk of hypotension after IM injection 
 Maximum dose 30mg in 24 hour period 
Haloperidol: 
 2.5-10mg IV or IM 
 Older conventional antipsychotic 
 Avoid in patients with QT prolongation as increases risk of torsades de points 
 Risk of dystonic drug reaction 
Risperidone: 
 0.25-2mg PO/SL 
 Newer atypical antipsychotic 
 Works very well in elderly, and combative dementia patients. 
 Orthostatic hy potension common early in treatment 
Complications of sedation and restraining patients: 
 Respiratory depression and pulmonary aspiration 
 Sudden cardiac death/Excited delirium 
 Hypotension 
 Deep venous thrombosis & pulmonary embolus 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Dystonic re actions 
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
 Anticholinergic effects 
 Delirium 
 Lactic acidosis 
 Lowered seizure threshold 
 Special problems in the elderly 
Delirium is defined as a transient, usually reversible, cause of cerebral dysfunction and ma nifests 
clinically with a wide range of neuropsychiatric abnormalities. It can occur at any age, but it occurs more 
commonly in patients who are elderly and have compromised mental status. 
Signs and symptoms 
The main symptoms of delirium include the follo wing: 
 Clouding of consciousness 
 Difficulty maintaining or shifting attention 
 Disorientation 
 Illusions 
 Hallucinations 
 Fluctuating levels of consciousness 
 Symptoms tend to fluctuate over the course of the day, with some improvement in the daytime 
and m aximum disturbance at night. Reversal of the sleep -wake cycle is common. 
Neurological symptoms may include the following: 
 Dysphasia 
 Dysarthria 
 Asterixis in hepatic encephalopathy and uremia 
 Motor abnormalities 
The diagnosis of deliri um is clinical 
Diagnostic criteria for delirium is as follows: 
 Disturbance in attention (ie, reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention) and 
awareness. 
 Change in cognition (eg, memory deficit, disorientation, language disturbance, per ceptual 
disturbance) that is not better accounted for by a preexisting, established, or evolving dementia. 
 The disturbance develops over a short period (usually hours to days) and tends to fluctuate 
during the course of the day. 
 There is evidence from th e history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the 
disturbance is caused by a direct physiologic consequence of a general medical condition, an 
intoxicating substance, medication use, or more than one cause. 
Management 
The goal of treatment is to determine the cause of the delirium and stop or reverse it. 
Components of delirium management include supportive therapy and pharmacologic 
management. 
Psychiatric consultation may be indicated for management of behavioral problems such as agitation or 
aggressive behavior. Mental confusion requires hospitalisation 
Preferable because it is short acting and has no active metabolites. In addition, can be used in both IM 
and IV forms. When patient needs to be sedated for longer than 24 h, this medication is excellent. 
Commonly used prophylactically to prevent delirium tremens. 
Initial: 2 -3 mg PO q8 -12hr PRN; not to exceed 10 mg/day 
Maintenance: 2 -6 mg/day PO di vided q8 -12hr 
 POST -TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER 
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD ) is a mental illness that can develop after a person is exposed to 
one or more traumatic events, such as sexual assault, warfare, traf fic collisions, terrorism or other 
threats on a person's life. 
Most people who have experienced a traumatizing event will not develop PTSD. People who experience 
interpersonal trauma (e.g., sexual assault, child abuse) are more likely to develop PTSD, as o pposed to 
people who experience non -assault based trauma such as accidents, natural disasters and witnessing 
trauma. Children are less likely to develop PTSD after trauma than adults, especially if they are under 
ten years of age. 
In the typical case, the individual with PTSD persistently avoids trauma -related thoughts and emotions, 
and discussion of the traumatic event, and may even have amnesia of the event. However, the event is 
commonly relived by the individual through intrusive, recurrent recollection s, flashbacks, and 
nightmares. 
The diagnostic criteria for PTSD, stipulated in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, may be summarized as: 
 Exposure to a stressful event or situation (either short or long last ing) of exceptionally 
threatening or catastrophic nature, which is likely to cause pervasive distress in almost anyone. 
 Persistent remembering, or "reliving" the stressor by intrusive flash backs, vivid memories, 
recurring dreams, or by experiencing distre ss when exposed to circumstances resembling or 
associated with the stressor. 
 Actual or preferred avoidance of circumstances resembling or associated with the stressor (not 
present before exposure to the stressor). 
 Either (1) or (2): 
1. Inability to recall, ei ther partially or completely, some important aspects of the period of 
exposure to the stressor 
2. Persistent symptoms of increased psychological sensitivity and arousal (not present before 
exposure to the stressor) shown by any two of the following: 
 difficult y in falling or staying asleep 
 irritability or outbursts of anger 
 difficulty in concentrating 
 hyper -vigilance 
 Exaggerated startle response. 
PTSD causes biochemical changes in the brain and body, that differ from other psychiatric disorders such 
as major d epression. 
Psychotherapy is the "gold standard" of treatment for PTSD. 
 DEPRESSION 
Depression is a common mental disorder, characterized by sadness, loss of interest or pleasure, feelings 
of guilt or low self -worth, disturbed sleep or appetite, f eelings of tiredness and poor concentration. 
Major depressive disorder has significant potential morbidity and mortality, contributing to suicide. 
Signs and symptoms 
Most patients with major depressive disorder present with a normal appearance. In patient s with more 
severe symptoms, a decline in grooming and hygiene may be observed, as well as a change in weight. 
Patients may also show the following: 
 Psychomotor retardation 
 Flattening or loss of reactivity in the patient's affect (ie, emotional expression ) 
 Psychomotor agitation or restlessness 
Major depressive disorder 
Among the criteria for a major depressive disorder, at least 5 of the following symptoms have to have 
been present during the same 2 -week period (and at least 1 of the symptoms must be di minished 
interest/pleasure or depressed mood): 
 Depressed mood: For children and adolescents, this can also be an irritable mood 
 Diminished interest or loss of pleasure in almost all activities (anhedonia) 
 Significant weight change or appetite disturbance : For children, this can be failure to achieve 
expected weight gain 
 Sleep disturbance (insomnia or hypersomnia) 
 Psychomotor agitation or retardation 
 Fatigue or loss of energy 
 Feelings of worthlessness 
 Diminished ability to think or concentrate; indeci siveness 
 Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide 
attempt or specific plan for committing suicide 
 Self-report screening instruments for depression include the following: 
Manageme nt 
In all patient populations, the combination of medication and psychotherapy generally provides. 
Psychiatric consultation may be indicated for management. 