Introduction 
Patients seek medical help for dete rmination and treatment of various 
health problems. Sometimes a combination of the patient’s history and a 
clinical examination by a primary level physician are enough to decide whether medical treatment is needed, and what treatment should be given. 
However, often laboratory investigatio ns or diagnostic imaging procedures 
are required to confirm a clinically su spected diagnosis or to obtain more 
accurate information. For example, malaria may be suspected by the 
presence of fever and by excluding other causes of fever on history and physical examination, but a firm diagnosis is made on microscopic examination of a blood slide. In a sec ond example, in a patient with acute 
abdominal pain, various underlying cau ses may be clinically suspected, but 
in most cases no firm diagnosis can be made without either ultrasound or X-ray examination. Otherwise, a potentially dangerous (and unnecessary, given the availability of the alternatives) abdominal operation would be the only way to establish a diagnosis. 
1.1 Clinical assessment 
History and physical examination should be carried out by medically 
qualified personnel using appropriate diagnostic instruments such as 
stethoscope, otoscope and sphygmomanometer. A list of essential clinical diagnostic equipment is given in Annex 1. 
16 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 The clinician should identify the patient, understand the major 
complaint and ask questions in order to explore the underlying cause of the 
complaint and make a clinical diagnosis. A major concern is to obtain the correct history of the patient and to clearly understand the complaints and their duration. Information about the duration of symptoms is often unreliable. If pain or other symptoms have persisted for days, months or 
years it may be difficult to obtain an accurate history. 
The physical examination should include a general examination and 
examination of the affected body syst em. The physical examination should 
take the privacy of the patient into consideration. 
In some cases, diagnosis of a disease is evident from the history and 
observations made during the physical examination, for example in patients 
with hypertension or certain skin diseases. In other cases, the clinician will 
make a tentative diagnosis or a selection of differential diagnoses for which more detailed investigations by la boratory and/or diagnostic imaging 
services are needed for clarification. The clinical symptoms together with the 
medical history and physical examination of the patient guide the clinician to 
request a diagnostic investigation for co nfirmation or exclusion of a disease. 
1.2 Diagnostic investigation 
There are three phases in the process of diagnostic investigation: 
• the pre-analytical phase 
• the analytical phase 
• the post-analytical phase. The pre-analytical phase comprises the time and all processes for the 
preparation of a patient for a diagnostic investigation to the moment when 
the investigation is made. The analytical phase comprises the time and all processes of a diagnostic investigation. The post-analytical phase comprises the time and all processes for reporting the results of the diagnostic investigation to the person who then undertakes the medical management of the patient. 
Errors made during each phase influence the clinical relevance of a 
diagnostic report, and precautions must be taken to avoid results that are 
misleading or provide false information. The analytical phase is under the 
Introduction 17 
control of the diagnostic service, wh ich has the responsibility for accurately 
performing the investigations. In contra st, during the pre-analytical and post-
analytical phases, other personnel, including the medical doctor and 
paramedical personnel who are not worki ng with the diagnostic service, are 
involved in the process; and errors made in these two phases influence the 
results such that they may no longer be clinically relevant. 
Surveys in the clinical health servi ces of developed countries revealed 
that 93% of errors identified are made during the pre-analytical and post-analytical phases, whereas only 7% of e rrors originate during the analytical 
phase, provided the diagnostic service h as established an effective system for 
internal quality control. It was also observed that in an ambulatory general medical examination less than 5% of the most common laboratory tests contributed to a new diagnosis and 0.7% to 16% to a new therapy [2]. 
The diagnostic service must familiariz e the clinician with the value of 
the information obtained from an investigation, including its diagnostic specificity. This requires constant communication between clinical staff and the diagnostic service. 
Diagnostic reports are valuable only when the information can be used 
for patient management. It is theref ore an obligation for the diagnostic 
service to provide the results to the clin ician in a timely manner so that the 
results can be interpreted together with the clinical findings for the patient. If 
the findings do not fit with the patient’s clinical picture, the clinician should discuss the problem with the laboratory and/or diagnostic imaging staff to find a reasonable explanation. Sometimes it may be useful for an experienced clinician to visit the dia gnostic service to confirm the diagnosis 
of the disease himself. It has been proven that the communication between clinicians and diagnostic services of a hospital is most effective if daily 
consultations are held to discuss patient s’ clinical problems and observations 
Diagnostic imaging 
2.1 Ultrasound examinations (ultrasonography) 
Ultrasonography has a significant impact on diagnostic work. Today, 
ultrasonography is the most frequently used imaging modality in certain 
medical disciplines (gastroenterology, urology, obstetrics), although the implementation of ultrasonography in distri ct hospitals is not yet standard in 
developing countries for the following reasons. • Equipment is still expensive. Rarely can a district hospital purchase an ultrasound machine from its own budget. Currently, ultrasound equipment used in district hospitals in developing countries is usually 
the result of donations. 
• The operation of ultrasound machines requires a constant power supply. Battery-operated equipmen t is available but expensive. 
• A local after-sales service is often not available for repair if breakdown occurs. 
• The clinical application of ultras ound investigation requires extensive 
education and continuing training, wh ich is generally not provided at 
local training institutions. 
Only very few countries have implemented regulations for the use of 
ultrasound examination, and examin ations are often performed by 
insufficiently trained personnel. This ma y be of more harm than benefit to 
the patient because of the potential incorrect diagnoses made. Ultrasound 
Diagnostic imaging 19 
investigation should be a systematic ex amination using sta ndardized sections 
and detailed delineation of all organs and performed only by sufficiently 
trained staff. The probe should not only be moved across the area where a 
pathological feature is expected, but a systematic examination of all organs and structures is obligatory. The person doing the ultrasound examinations must have sound medical knowledge as well as sufficient training in 
sonography; these are essential for co rrect and safe examinations. The 
interpretation of certain findings may be difficult for various reasons, such as 
obesity, uncooperative patients, a high amount of gas in the intestine, an empty bladder (catheter), in an inves tigation of emergency cases, or due to 
an inappropriate probe being used for the requested examination (this frequently occurs in infants). 
Ultrasonography is an excellent initial examination procedure for 
many abdominal, gynaecological a nd obstetric disorders. During 
sonographic examination, high frequency sound waves transmitted into the body are partly or totally reflected (following the physical laws of reflection) to the surface (i.e. the receiver) when passing from one type of tissue to another. The distance from the surface to an organ in the body correlates with the time interval between th e emission of the sound wave and the 
reception of the reflected portion. This time interval and the intensity of the reflected wave are registered by the computer and is used for “constructing” an ultrasonographic image. 
Ultrasonography distinguishes well between various types of soft 
tissue. It is therefore predominantly used for abdominal examinations, including obstetric examinations. As the sound waves used in clinical settings do not sufficiently penetrate bony structures or air/gas, ultrasonography is not suitable for pulmonary examinations or for examinations of the skeleton and the brain, which is surrounded by bones. 
For the brain, however, there is one ex ception in newborns and infants where 
the fontanelles are still open. These ope nings can be used for ultrasound 
examination of the brain. 
Annex 3 comprises two recipes for making contact gel for use in 
ultrasonography. 
20 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 2.2 Conventional X-ray examinations 
The principles behind X-ray imaging techniques are the same as for 
those for ordinary photography. The light ( visible , low-energy for 
photography; invisible and high-energy for X-ray examinations) induces 
changes on a photographic film or in an electric detector. X-rays have more 
energy than visible light and can penetrate material that is opaque to visible 
light. The amount of X-rays penetrating a given material—in our case the human body—depends upon the material’s physicochemical properties. 
More specifically, it depends upon the size of atoms in the material. In general, light atoms—those with low atomic weights—allow more of the X-rays to pass through than heavier atom s, i.e. with higher atomic weights. 
In a broad sense the human body consists of three types of material: 
soft tissue , containing mainly light atoms, bone containing heavy atoms 
(minerals), and air (or some sort of gas) built up of very light atoms. A film 
exposed to X-rays that have penetr ated a human body will show white or 
very bright areas (little exposure to X-rays), grey areas (more exposure), or nearly black areas (heavy exposure) depending upon the amounts of X-rays that penetrate various parts of the body. For example, bones appear very bright or white on film, because they absorb a large amount of X-rays, whereas gas-filled areas appear nearly black, because they let a large amount 
of X-rays pass through. 
As soft tissues, including muscles, blood vessels, liver and kidneys, 
have nearly the same chemical composition (mainly hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and carbon), it is rarely possibl e to distinguish between these tissues 
on an X-ray film without using more complicated procedures of investigation (contrast agent for conventional X-rays or computed tomography). In such cases the method of choice for diagnostic imaging will 
often be sonography, which distingui shes better between various types of 
soft tissue. 
2.3 Computed tomography 
Computed tomography images are gene rated using the same principles 
as conventional X-ray images. In co mputed tomography, X-rays are 
Diagnostic imaging 21 
generated and allowed to penetrate th e body and are picked up by detectors 
as electrical signals instead of creating an image on a photographic film via a 
chemical process. The signals are anal ysed by computer, which generates a 
picture showing an anatomical cross-section of the part of the body under investigation. The sensitivity of comput ed tomography is much higher than 
that of conventional X-ray systems. Different types of soft tissue may be more easily distinguished. The comput ed tomography images are built up 
digitally; therefore it is possible to manipulate the images on display (contrast, brightness, etc.) or to tran smit the pictures electronically to other 
monitors within a hospital or to remote destinations (teleradiology). 
2.4 Magnetic resonance imaging 
Magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, represents a new technique for 
diagnostic imaging in which the physical principle differs from X-ray, computed tomography and sonography. MRI is regarded as safe for the patient and in certain cases gives mo re diagnostic information than other 
examinations. However, the high costs and special training that is required for MRI makes this technology inappropriate for most small and mid-size hospitals. 
2.5 Radiation protection of patients 
There is no scientific evidence that diagnostic procedures that are not 
based on ionizing radiation (sonography and magnetic resonance imaging) 
are harmful to pregnant women and fe tuses. However, too much exposure to 
ionizing radiation can be harmful and so any use of ionizing radiation for 
diagnostic purposes must be medically justified; the radiation dose applied 
should be according to the ALARA principle— as low as reasonably 
achievable. When accepting these rules, radiological examinations may even 
be considered in pregnant women wit hout fearing harm to the patient or 
fetus, provided that the absorbed radiation dose to the embryo/fetus is well below the internationally agreed limit of 100 mGy. 
For the purpose of this document it is assumed that hospitals will have 
one or two basic stationary X-ray m achines, perhaps a mobile X-ray unit, 
22 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 and a general purpose ultrasound machine. It is also assumed that no 
radiologist is available—or at least not necessarily on a permanent basis. 
It should be emphasized that any diagnostic efforts are only justified 
when appropriate therapeutic measures can be taken. Where means for treatment are limited, diagnostic efforts should be limited accordingly. In such a situation the patient should be transferred to another hospital where 
treatment can be provided. The gene ral recommendations are valid only for 
the “average patient”. For the individual patient techniques and procedures need to be tailored according to sp ecific clinical problems and findings. 
Laboratory services and 
laboratory investigations 
A proper request for laboratory investigations necessitates a 
knowledge of the pathology of a disease as well as the technical aspects of 
laboratory analysis. Clinicians shoul d know beforehand the value of the 
information that they can expect fro m a laboratory with respect to the 
clinical situation of the patient. Surprisingly, even in a large general hospital with an intensive care unit, it was found that 82% of all laboratory results were within normal range [1]. There is no doubt that the number of normal 
results could be considerably reduced if the indication for orders were 
identified by the physician with mo re appropriate care. Experience has 
shown that a laboratory must also be pr oactive in collaborating with clinical 
staff to solve these problems, for the following reasons. • The laboratory communicates with all departments of the health services. Therefore it is in a better position to address and develop solutions that are of common concern. 
• There is a difference in the way problems are solved from the clinical and laboratory perspectives. The laboratory examines and analyses specimens and provides information th at makes reference to scientific 
concepts that have been developed on the basis of statistically verified 
data. In contrast, the physician is concerned with the health problems 
of an individual. Clinical diagnosis is based on experience with individuals rather than statistical analysis, and the doctor focuses on medical history as well as physical and psychological observations of the patient. 
24 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Very often a laboratory is insufficiently informed about the clinical 
situation and previous treatment of a patient. The laboratory is frequently confined to producing laboratory results without knowing all the pre-analytical elements that may have influenced the outcome 
of a measurement. In contrast, a physician takes laboratory results for granted and does not realize that their correct interpretation requires the knowledge of a variety of technical and biological factors. This is also true for the established re ference intervals for laboratory 
indicators. The physician must be familiar with the reference values and reference intervals that are u sed by a laboratory when reviewing 
laboratory reports. This section briefly outlines aspects of the pre-analytical and post-
analytical phases of laboratory investig ations that should be known by the 
physician and paramedical personnel. The reader is referred to the WHO 
Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean publication Basics of quality 
assurance in laboratories at peripheral and intermediate level to learn about 
other aspects that are part of the analytical phase [3]. 
3.1 Biological aspects 
The concentrations of biological indicators in healthy persons vary 
within a given time period to a smaller or greater extent. The inter-individual variation of the indicators is expressed by the inter-individual coefficient of variation (CV
g). A laboratory method for quantitative measurement must be 
able to take into account intra-individual fluctuations; therefore the precision of measurement using a given method should have a CV which is less than the CV
g. Otherwise the method will not allow a comparison of results with 
sufficient confidence. As a widely accepted recommendation, methods should be used that have a CV < 0.25CV
g [4]. Only methods that fulfil these 
criteria should be used to establish nor mal reference intervals from healthy 
populations. Visual comparative techniques for haemoglobin measurement using a simple filter paper method (haemoglobin colour scales) should not by used by medical laboratories, because the precision of this method is low and does not meet the analytical requirements of a laboratory test [3]. The 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 25 
results obtained from such a test are very often misleading the physician to 
make a false diagnosis. 
Physiological and/or behavioural conditions of the patient may 
influence laboratory measurements. They include: • genetic and ethnic disposition 
• nutrition 
• geographical factors 
• biorhythmic fluctuations 
• pregnancy 
• physical exercise 
• use of drugs and traditional medicines. 
3.1.1 Genetic and ethnic disposition Many genetic factors contribute to the variety of human physiognomy. 
Certain genetic factors, such as the human ABO blood groups, do not cause disease, but are important in health care. Other genetic factors may cause a disease in childhood (for example, phenylketonuria, thalassaemia, sickle-cell disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency) or adulthood (for example, certain forms of muscular dystrophy, rheumatic disease). Other genetic factors may predispose to the clinical manifestation of a disease after a change in lifestyle. Thus, in a number of developing countries today there are more cases of diabetes mellitus or hyperlipoproteinaemia; in the past 
these diseases were less apparent as the population had a different lifestyle. 
The prevalence of genetic diseases ma y vary from one population to 
another. Thalassaemias are predominant in the populations of the Eastern Mediterranean and South-East Asian regions of WHO, whereas haemoglobin 
E (HbE) disease is more prevalent in the populations of the Western Pacific Region; the highest prevalence of sick le-cell disease is among the African 
population. Phenylketonuria is more prevalent in the Caucasian population. 
Reference intervals for laboratory in dicators are used to distinguish 
between a normal and a pathological state of health. Textbooks state reference intervals derived from one population, but these may not necessarily be transferable to other populations. It is only a preliminary 
26 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 solution to use normal reference interv als that were not established from the 
local population; the laboratory in co llaboration with the physician should 
try hard to establish reference interv als for healthy individuals taken from 
the indigenous population. 
There is surprisingly little information about ethnic disposition and 
reference intervals. The reference intervals for a number of laboratory 
indicators, including serum electrolytes, are the same in different ethnic 
groups. Interestingly, this seems also to be true for blood haemoglobin concentration. In ethnic groups with a high prevalence of thalassaemia (such 
as the indigenous people of Oman), the reference intervals for blood haemoglobin are the same as in ot her populations, although the normal 
reference intervals of other haematological indicators, including the MCV and WBC, are lower in these populations than in Caucasian populations [Nam D. Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Al Khod, Oman. Private 
communication, 1999]. It is important to identify the ethnic disposition when establishing reference intervals for a healthy indigenous population. This requires close collaboration between the physician and the laboratory. Table 
3.1 lists the means or lower limits of reference intervals a few indicators for 
which ethnic differences have been observed [WHO unpublished observation, 2001]. 
Table 3.1 Means or lower limits of refere nce intervals of indicators in 
different ethnic groups 
Indicator Caucasian Arab African Asian 
Creatine kinase (U/L) 100 180 115 
Pancreas α-amylase 
(U/L) 90 150 
WBC* (x1000)/ µL 4.4 **2.2** 3.4 ***3.0*** 
MCV* (fL) 80 **60** 77 69 
*lower limit of reference interval. 
**Omani population. ***Indonesian population. 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 27 
3.1.2 Age 
Often, older text books mention reference intervals that were 
established in adults. However, more extensive epidemiological studies have 
revealed that the reference intervals re main constant during the whole period 
of life in only a few laboratory indicators, including some but not all serum electrolytes. The largest changes of reference intervals occur between the 
newborn and adolescent periods. For example, serum alkaline phosphatase activity that may be abnormally high in an adult may still be considered normal in an adolescent. Table 3.2 gives examples of age-dependent changes in selected laboratory indicators. 
Table 3.2 Age-related changes of laboratory indicators 
Indicator Change 
Alkaline phosphatase increased during adolescence 
Bilirubin considerably increased at birth 
Cholesterol increases with age WBC considerably increased at birth 
3.1.3 Nutrition 
Nutrition affects many laboratory indicators in blood, plasma and 
serum as well as urine. Typically, serum triglyceride and glucose concentrations increase after the ing estion of a fatty and/or carbohydrate-rich 
meal. Creatinine concentrations are el evated in subjects who eat a lot of 
meat. As a rule, laboratory measuremen ts of metabolic indicators are made 
in blood specimens from subjects who are in a baseline metabolic state. The physician should take measures to ensu re that the patient meets optimal 
conditions for taking blood, which is usually after 12 hours fasting. Table 3.3 
lists the changes of common laboratory indicators following the ingestion of a meal. 
28 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 3.3 Nutritional effects on laboratory indicators 
Indicator Change 
Alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) increase 20% 
Aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) increase 10% 
Serum bilirubin increase 15% Serum glucose increase 15% Serum potassium increase 10% Serum phosphate increase 15% Serum triglycerides increase 50% 
For certain investigations it is necessary to take blood several times 
during a day, for example, to establish a glucose profile. The laboratory should advise the clinician on the ex act timing for taking blood; otherwise 
the results of the measurements cannot be properly evaluated and are not comparable. 
3.1.4 Geographical factors 
Red blood cell counts, haematocri t and haemoglobin levels are 
elevated in residents who live at hi gher altitudes (at 1400 metres and above). 
The elevated laboratory indicators are not caused by ethnic disposition but result from the lower oxygen concentration in the air at high altitude. The laboratory should take this effect into consideration when establishing 
reference intervals for populations who live at higher altitudes. Table 3.4 lists changes in some indicators that are due to altitude. 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 29 
Table 3.4 Effect of altitude on mean 
concentrations of laboratory indicators 
Indicator Change 
CRP up to 65% at 3600 m 
Haemoglobin up to 8% at 1400 m 
Haematocrit up to 8% at 1400 m Serum uric acid up to 8% at 1400 m 
3.1.5 Biorhythmic fluctuations 
Biorhythmic fluctuations occur in many laboratory indicators. These 
fluctuations may be daily, monthly or annually. The WBC is about 15% 
higher in the evening than in the morning; in contrast, blood haemoglobin is about 10% lower at night than during the day. Corticosteroids and thyroid hormone concentrations also fluctuat e in a daily rhythm. Serum phosphate 
and iron concentrations are about 30% and 60% higher during the day than during the night. Urine sodium is highest during the early morning hours, whereas urine phosphate is highest du ring the evening. These observations 
make it evident that the time for co llection of the specimen for analysis 
should be indicated on the request form. 
In women the concentrations of sex hormones fluctuate in a monthly 
rhythm and are related to the menstrual cycle. Monthly changes also occur in 
serum iron, serum phosphate and serum protein concentrations in females. It is more difficult to demonstrate long-term rhythms in the concentrations of laboratory indicators, because they may be hidden behind nutritional effects and/or the effects of ageing. 
Biorhythmic changes must also be considered in the diagnosis of 
certain parasitic infections, including malaria and microfilaria, and bacterial infections. Depending on the biorhythm in the proliferation of the parasite, 
the clinician must decide on the optimal timing for taking blood to collect material that has the highest content of parasites. 
30 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 3.1.6 Sex 
The reference intervals of certain laboratory indicators are gender 
dependent, including blood cells, serum enzymes, serum electrolytes, serum metabolites and hormones. Table 3.5 lists selected laboratory indicators with 
sex-dependent reference intervals. 
Table 3.5 Sex-related changes in certain 
laboratory indicators 
Indicator Male/female ratio of concentration 
Bilirubin increased 
Serum creatinine increased 
Creatine kinase increased γ-glutamyl transferase increased 
Erythrocyte count increased Haematocrit increased Blood haemoglobin increased Serum transaminases increased Serum triglycerides increased Serum urea increased Serum uric acid increased HDL-cholesterol decreased 
3.1.7 Pregnancy 
In pregnancy the reference intervals of laboratory indicators in blood 
or serum, including clotting factors, serum enzyme activity, hormone levels, 
serum metabolites, blood cell concentr ations and serum proteins, do not 
apply. Table 3.6 indicates typical changes in laboratory indicators commonly observed during pregnancy. 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 31 
Table 3.6 Changes in mean concentrations 
of laboratory indicators during pregnancy 
Indicator Change 
Serum alkaline phosphatase increased 
Erythrocyte sediment ation rate increased 
CRP increased 
Serum albumin decreased Serum proteins decreased Serum iron decreased 
Tests for urine human choriogona dotropin (hCG) are used for the 
diagnosis of early pregnancy. Some t est kits show a positive result after only 
two weeks of fertilization; other tests are positive after four weeks or later. The laboratory and the clinician must be aware of these differences when different tests kits are used. 
3.1.8 Physical exercise 
Heavy physical exercise decreases the blood volume. Consequently, 
laboratory indicators confined to the blood compartment, including blood cells, serum enzyme activities and clotting factors, are increased. Certain hormones may be considerably decreased after prolonged physical exercise. 
Table 3.7 lists laboratory indicators that change during prolonged physical exercise (for example, long distance running). 
Increased red blood cell count and haemoglobinuria are often seen 
after prolonged physical exercise; these findings could give rise to a misleading diagnosis. 
32 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 3.7 Effect of physical exercise 
on laboratory indicators 
Indicator Increase 
Creatine kinase 400% 
Pyruvate kinase 250% 
Aspartate aminotransferase 50% 
Serum bilirubin 50% Serum urea 30% 
Urine RBC elevated 
3.1.9 Drugs 
Certain drugs and medicinal plants alter the concentrations of 
laboratory indicators in a patient. Drug effects are observed in the clotting system, serum enzyme activities and serum metabolites. The effects indicate the expected outcome (for example, vitamin K antagonists prolong the clotting time) or may be regarded as side-effects of drug treatment (for example, prolonged clotting time duri ng treatment with cephalosporines). 
Often, the accidental observation of an abnormal laboratory result can be attributed to a drug that has been used for treatment of a patient. Table 3.8 lists certain drugs that are commonly used and their side effects. 
Table 3.8 Drug effects on concentrations of laboratory indicators 
Indicator Change 
Acetylsalicylic acid reduced platelet aggregation 
Alcohol increased AST, γ-glutamyl transferase (chronic effect) 
Anti-vitamin K prolonged clotting time 
Barbiturates aminotransferases increased 
Cephalosporines prothrombin time pr olonged; platelet aggregation inhibited 
Heroin increased cholesterol, serum potassium 
Morphine increased amylase, lipase, ALT 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 33 
3.2 Choice of laboratory indicators and test systems 
In the diseased state, a number of la boratory indicators may be altered. 
For example, for the diagnosis of anaemia, measurements of several 
laboratory indicators (haemoglobin, ha ematocrit or red blood cell count) can 
For each individual laboratory indicator a range of tests may be 
available. However, the analytical property (specificity, sensitivity, precision, 
bias) may differ from one test system to another. The different characteristics makes it necessary to define the acceptab ility of a test by taking into account 
the specific needs of the health service to which a laboratory result is being 
provided. For example, the copper sulfate method may be acceptable for the distinction of anaemic from non-anaemic subjects for blood donation. However, in a clinical setting, where haemoglobin must be quantitatively measured for accurate diagnosis and mon itoring of treatment of patients, this 
method is inappropriate, a nd more accurate methods must be used by the 
laboratory. 
The laboratory should discuss the suitability of a laboratory test given 
the needs of the medical staff ordering the test. In addition to the performance of the test, the clinician and the laboratory must consider the 
costs of performing the test. 
Sometimes a laboratory indicator can indicate an abnormality, but is 
not specific to make a diagnosis of a disease. A typical example of an indicator with no diagnostic specificity is the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). In fact, the majority of quantitative tests in clinical chemistry provide non-specific information, such as ser um transaminase activity, which is 
elevated in a number of diseases. Often, only the combined use and interpretation of a selection of laborator y test results will provide conclusive 
information. Therefore, in practice a clinician uses a cluster of tests to make a clinical diagnosis of a disease. 
Some tests are used as surrogate t ests for the exclusion of certain 
diseases. For example, ALT activity in serum is measured to exclude high risk donors for transmitting an infectious disease. ALT activity is not a specific indicator of infectious disease. However, subjects suffering from liver damage usually have an elevate pl asma ALT. Very often the damage is 
34 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 caused by microbial infection. Tests wi th a low specificity are widely used 
for monitoring the development of a disease, because they are more cost-
effective. The coagulation tests, prothrombin time and activated partial 
thromboplastin time belong to that group. These tests indicate an alteration of the coagulation system, but do not provide information on the individual clotting factor that has caused the alteration. 
Certain tests are used for screening. Screening tests usually have a low 
clinical diagnostic specificity, whereas their diagnostic sensitivity should be high. For example, the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of red blood cells unspecifically indicates an abnormality in a patient. It is low in thalassaemia, but also in iron deficiency and othe r diseases. Further investigations are 
needed to specify the underlying cau se of the disease. In thalassaemia the 
size distribution of red blood cells, which is commonly expressed in the red blood cell distribution width, RDW, is narrow. In contrast, in iron-deficiency anaemia the MCV is low whereas the RDW is increased. However, the clinician should be aware that a patient may suffer both from thalassaemia and iron deficiency. Consequently, the MCV will be low and the RDW will be high in blood of such a patient. 
Results of tests with high specificity are useful for the laboratory 
diagnosis of a disease. Microscopic investigations, as used in the diagnosis of parasitic infections, have a lo w diagnostic sensitivity but a high 
specificity, and positive observation by microscopy usually allows for a clinical diagnosis. A few quantitative tests are specific enough to confirm the diagnosis of a disease. For example, low or absent concentrations of clotting factors VIII or IX in a patient w ho is not on drug treatment provide 
conclusive information for the di agnosis of haem ophilia A and B, 
respectively. 
Some tests are useful to assess the ac ute clinical state of a patient, 
whereas they do not provide information on the long-term state in chronic disease. Typically, serum glucose levels indicate the actual situation of glucose metabolism in a patient. Howe ver, the metabolism of glucose is 
rapid, and elevated glucose concentrat ions in a patient do not reflect the 
diabetic state of the patient over a long period. For this, glycated haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) is a better monitoring indicator. Similarly, specific IgM concentrations in serum are elevated during the acute phase of 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 35 
infection by a viral agent, whereas elev ated IgG concentrations are elevated 
in the post-acute state and chronic state of an infection. 
3.3 Technical pre-analytical and post-analytical 
There are several steps during the pre-analytical phase that are not 
under the control of the laboratory ser vices. The clinician and paramedical 
staff should be aware of errors that can be made during the handling of 
patient material for investigation [3]. These steps include: 
• the preparation of the patient for the collection of specimens 
• the collection of specimens for laboratory analysis 
• the transport and storage of specimens prior to analysis. Medical and paramedical staff can avoid errors during specimen 
collection if they are familiar with the sampling procedures, including the preparation of the patient and the use of appropriate instruments and devices for sampling. 
Certain techniques for collection of specimens should only be applied 
by the clinician, such as collection of cerebrospinal fluid, pleural fluid, 
peritoneal fluid and arterial blood. Other techniques, including sputum and throat swab collection, urine and stool sampling, and collection of specimens from skin and wounds, can be performed by paramedical staff. 
3.3.1 Blood 
In some countries only medical personnel are allowed to collect blood; 
in other countries paramedical personne l are allowed to collect venous and 
capillary blood. Special attention must be taken in order to avoid haemolysis 
during sampling of blood or cerebrospinal fluid, since haemolysis has pronounced effects on the measurement of a number of laboratory indicators. 
The laboratory should inform the medical staff that haemolysed specimens must be rejected for certain measurements, because the results will not allow a conclusion on the clinical situation of the patient. Similarly, hyperlipidaemia and turbidity interferes with a number of measurements. Table 3.9 lists indicators for which the measurements are affected by haemolysis and hyperlipidaemia. 
36 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 3.9 Effect of haemolysis and hyperlipidaemia 
on the measurement of laboratory indicators 
Indicator Effect 
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) increased by haemolysis 
Aspartate aminotransferase increased by haemolysis 
Alanine aminotransferase increased by haemolysis Creatine kinase increased by haemolysis Serum potassium increased by haemolysis Alkaline phosphatase decreased by haemolysis γ-glutamyl transferase decreased by haemolysis 
Serum uric acid increased by hyperlipidaemia Serum glucose increased by hyperlipidaemia 
3.3.2 Cerebrospinal fluid 
Special precautions must be taken for the collection and transportation 
of cerebrospinal fluid for haematologi cal, immunological, clinical–chemical 
and bacteriological investigations. 
A diagnosis of acute intracerebral bleeding can be made only from the 
observation of sanguineous cerebrospinal fluid. Therefore care must be taken 
to avoid accidental puncture of a vein during cerebrospinal fluid collection. 
The cerebrospinal fluid must be transported to the laboratory as quickly 
as possible for microscopic, bacterio logical and biochemical analysis. The 
laboratory should be informed in advan ce that cerebrospinal fluid samples are 
to be collected. White blood cells disa ppear within a short time and cannot be 
properly investigated after delayed transfer of the material to the laboratory. 
Similarly, glucose in cerebrospinal flui d is rapidly metabolized by enzymes of 
destroyed cells. Therefore, a glycolysis inhibitor should be added. Whenever 
possible, the cerebrospinal fluid specim ens should be transported in a tube 
placed in a beaker with lukewarm water (30–37 °C). 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 37 
3.3.3 Stool 
Stool samples must be rapidly transferred to the laboratory for the 
examination of red blood cells and white (pus) cells, bacteria of 
characteristic shape and motility, and motile trophozoites. Stool for cysts, ova or helminth larvae must be examined within 24 hours. Hookworm larvae 
may hatch in stool that has been standing for some hours; larvae of 
Strongyloides stercoralis are only seen in fresh stool. Specimens for ova of 
Enterobius vermicularis are taken from the anal skin using a moistened swab 
or sticky tape. 
3.3.4 Collection, storage and transport of specimens 
The timing of sampling is important for laboratory investigations of 
indicators of metabolism. Blood should be collected in the morning before breakfast. The patient should avoid a “heavy” meal the evening before and 
should have fasted overnight. 
Although it is more difficult to consider the timing for blood sampling 
in outpatients, patients should at least be instructed on how to prepare themselves for blood sampling. Errors in the collection of specimens (venous 
blood, capillary blood, cerebrospinal flui d, urine, stool, discharge, etc.) from 
a patient and their transport to the la boratory are described in detail in Basics 
of quality assurance for intermediate and peripheral laboratories [3]. 
The measurement of certain laboratory indicators will give different 
results depending on the origin of the collected blood. Venous blood glucose concentrations are about 5% to 10% lower than plasma glucose concentrations. These differences should be considered, when different techniques for blood collection and measurement are used. 
Blood concentrations of laboratory indicators may differ when blood 
is taken from a patient in the horizontal or vertical position. The difference in results may be up to 15% for certain indicators. Table 3.10 indicates the changes in selected indicators as a consequence of the positioning of healthy subjects from the horizontal to the upright position. The differences may be more pronounced in diseased individuals. 
38 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 3.10 Changes in selected laboratory 
indicators from upright patient 
compared to horizontal patient 
Indicator Change 
Erythrocytes 15% increase 
Haemoglobin 5% increase 
Haematocrit 12% increase WBC 7% increase Serum albumin 8% increase Alkaline phosphatase 6% increase Serum cholesterol 10% increase 
changes in selected indicators as a consequence of the positioning of healthy 
subjects from the horizontal to the upright position. The differences may be more pronounced in diseased individuals. 
Special attention should be paid when collecting blood from patients 
who are receiving infusion therapy. Plasma expanders expand the volume of blood and reduce the concentration of blood components. In addition, some plasma expanders affect certain enzy me reactions. As a rule, blood samples 
should not be taken from the same side of the body as the site of an infusion of fluid or drugs; rather the contra-lateral side should be used. Table 3.11 lists infusions that affect the measurement of laboratory indicators: 
Changes also occur after surgical in tervention. For example, urea and 
C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increase after surgical treatment, whereas albumin level may decrease. 
Biochemical processes continue to proceed after blood collection. 
Blood cells metabolize, and blood enzy mes continue to react. Therefore 
reagents are added to blood or cerebrospinal fluid containers to inhibit ongoing biological processes. Today, the containers (usually test-tubes) are specifically prepared for the transportation of blood, plasma or serum. The 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 39 
Table 3.11 Effect of infusion solutions on the measurement of selected 
laboratory indicators 
Infusion Affected laboratory 
indicator Effect 
Citrate clotting tests prolonged 
 pH of blood decreased 
Electrolytes plasma electrolytes increased Glucose serum glucose increased serum potassium decreased serum phosphate decreased serum amylase decreased Fructose uric acid increased Dextran thrombin time prolonged serum protein increased (method dependent, biuret 
 serum urea decreased blood group serology pseudo-agglutination Immunoglobulins viral tests false positive 
tubes are marked with colours that can be easily identified and selected by 
personnel for collecting specimens for specific laboratory analyses. Table 3.12 lists the recommended containers with specific inhibitors and their purposes for analysing blood, plasma, serum or cerebrospinal fluid. 
Anticoagulants are additives that inhibit blood and/or plasma from 
clotting so that the indicator to be measured is changed as little as possible before the analytical process. Anticoagulation is achieved by either the binding of calcium ions (EDTA, citrate) or by the inhibition of thrombin 
40 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 3.12 Specified containers for blood collection 
Indicator Effect 
Heparin inhibition of clotting 
EDTA inhibition of platelet aggregation and 
enzyme activation 
Citrate inhibition of clotting 
Sodium oxalate calcium bind ing, inhibition of clotting 
Glycolysis inhibitors (iodine acetate 
sodium) (sodium fluoride) inhibition of glycolytic enzymes 
Inhibitors of proteinolysis (apr otinine) inhibition of proteases 
Antibiotics inhibition of bacterial growth 
Gel separators separation of blood cells from plasma 
activity (heparinates, hirudin). For citrate it is important that the blood is mixed in the following concentrations immediately after sample collection: • one part 0.109 mol (3.2%) citric acid (pH 5.5 to 5.6) is mixed with nine parts blood for coagulation tests. 
• one part of 0.109 mol (3.2%) citric acid (pH 5.5 to 5.6) is mixed with four parts blood to determine the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The colour codes of tubes containing anticoagulants for blood 
collection according to the ISO 6710 standard are: 
EDTA lavender citrate 9:1 light bluecitrate 4:1 black heparinate green no additives (for serum) red. 
Storage and transport can change the nature of the specimen. The 
results of specimens that have been in adequately stored and transported may 
be incorrect and therefore give ri se to inappropriate medical action. 
Therefore the physician should be fami liar with the specific conditions of 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 41 
transport and storage of specimens fo r laboratory analysis. This applies 
equally to blood, plasma, serum, cerebr ospinal fluid, urine and stool. The 
laboratory must provide full and specifi c information to the physicians and 
paramedical staff on the use of appropria te containers and the conditions of 
transport and storage of specimens. The containers are different for 
investigations in clinical chemistr y, haematology and microbiology. For 
example, EDTA tubes for the transportation of blood for cell counting cannot be used for certain clinical chemical investigations, such as calcium and 
alkaline phosphatase measurements, si nce the EDTA interferes with the 
measurement procedure. The use of antimicrobials as preservatives for microbiological investigations in blo od and urine is obsolete, because they 
inhibit the growth of microorganisms. On the contrary, optimal conditions must be chosen to sustain the viability of microorganisms prior to culture. 
The phlebotomist should adopt a standard procedure when collecting 
blood in more than one tube. The following sequence for blood collection has proved to be useful: • tube for blood culture 
• tube for serum (no additive in the tube) 
• tube citrate plasma 
• tube heparin blood 
• tube EDTA 
• tube with glycolytic inhibitor. The phlebotomist must fill each tube containing an additive with the 
recommended volume of blood. Otherwise, the concentration of the additive will be too high or low, which may lead to incorrect results. For example, it is important to exactly mix 9 parts of blood with 1 part of 3.2% citrate 
solution. If the volume of blood added to a citrate-containing tube is too 
small, the clotting time will be artificia lly prolonged, not only because of an 
incorrect dilution of the clotting factors in the sample, but also, because the activation process of the plasma coagulation is inhibited. 
The physician and paramedical staff should also be familiar with the 
optimal conditions of storage of specimens. For example, the plasma potassium concentration will rise significantly when blood is stored at 4 °C as well as at 30 °C or 37 °C for seve ral hours. Significant changes are also 
observed in plasma enzyme activities (alanine aminotransferase) when blood 
42 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 specimens are stored at 4° or 37 °C. Conversely, glucose concentration in 
blood decreases when stored under these conditions. Certain indicators are 
destroyed by bright light, such as b ilirubin. This is why specimens should 
never be exposed to sunlight dur ing storage and transportation. 
These changes are more pronounced when blood rather than plasma or 
serum is stored. As a rule, plasma sh ould be separated from blood cells as 
soon as possible to minimize the effect s of storage, due to leakage of 
components from blood cells. 
Needles and syringes and other sharp objects must be disposed of in 
leak proof containers after they are used for specimen collection in order to reduce the risk of infection and injury. The containers should be labelled clearly and placed close to where the specimens are routinely taken. All 
plastic syringes and needles must be used only once and properly disposed by incineration and/or destruction. Small instruments are available which completely destroy needles. Urine, stool and other body fluids may be flushed down the laboratory sluice or the toilet. 
3.3.5 Pre-analytical aspects of microbiology 
The outcome of microbiological investigations is important for the 
monitoring and treatment of individual pa tients, and for the investigations of 
diseases causing outbreaks and their surve illance. Bacteria and parasites may 
develop resistance against drugs used for antimicrobial therapy. The re-emergence of infectious diseases as the result of the development of antimicrobial resistance in microorganisms has become a worldwide concern. It is caused by a lack of communication between the diagnostic and therapeutic sectors in health care and the uncontrolled use of antimicrobials. 
Paramedical staff may collect urethral discharge using sterile swabs 
(urethral swab) or directly on to clean glass slides. High vaginal swabs (HVS), endocervical swabs (ECS), cerebro spinal fluid, joint fluid, pleural 
fluid and peritoneal fluid are coll ected by the physician and submitted 
immediately to the laboratory for examination. It is wise to inform the laboratory in advance that these samples are about to be collected so they 
can be processed immediately. Skin scrapings and specimens of hair and nails are submitted dry to the laboratory in a clean jar or wrapped in a piece 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 43 
of clean paper. All wet preparations for bacteriological and parasitological 
examination must be examined as soon as possible in the laboratory. 
The technical aspects for collection and transport of clinical 
specimens for microbiological examination are outlined in detail in 
Specimen collection and transport for microbiological investigation [5]. The 
following rules are particularly important for the physician to remember. 1. The physician must decide upon the usefulness of a microbiological 
investigation. Whenever possible, use antimicrobial sensitivity data 
collected at regional sentinel sites, if the laboratory cannot provide investigations of antimicrobial sen sitivity. Some bacteria are always 
susceptible to certain antimicrobials. Treatment can be immediately initiated without an antibiogram after the identification of the bacteria. 
2. The appropriate material that must be collected for the diagnosis of an 
infectious disease in a patient. For example, observations from saliva rather than from expectorate of th e lower respiratory tract are not 
useful in identifying the microorganism causing pneumonia. 
3. The physician must indicate to the laboratory the current medical 
treatment of the patient, and antimicrobial therapy in particular. 
4. Specimen collection must be made before (and not after) the start of 
antimicrobial therapy. Microorganisms that have already been exposed to antimicrobials may not grow adequately in culture, and the recommendations for antimicrobial therapy made by the laboratory may therefore be misleading. 
5. The clinician must consider the appropriate timing of specimen 
collection. In patients with fever, the specimen should be collected when the temperature is highest. Often this is during evening hours. For the diagnosis of certain pa rasitic infections (plasmodium, 
microfilaria) the biorhythm of the parasite must be considered. 
6. The physician must collect an adequate volume of the specimen using 
sterile equipment, place it in a sterile container and deliver the sample under the appropriate conditions of temperature to the laboratory as soon as possible for investigation. Some microorganisms (Meningococci , Chlamydia , Bordetella pertussis ) are fragile. Urine 
should be transported at 4 °C to limit the growth of bacteria in the urine. A pinch of boric acid can be added to limit growth of bacteria 
44 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 during transport. Blood, cerebrospinal fluid and genital tract discharge 
material should be transported at body or room temperature. (see 
Section 3.3.2 on cerebrospinal fluid). 
7. The physician must collect the specimen for microbial examination in 
the appropriate transport medium to ensure the viability of the organism. When blood is collected in culture bottles the minimal blood volume should be: 1 mL from children below the age of 2; 5 mL in persons who are 11 years and above. Blood for bacterial investigation should never be stored in the refrigerator. 
8. Physicians must understand the mean ing of the terms used to describe 
the properties of microorganisms as reported in antimicrobial susceptibility test
1 results. Otherwise they will not be able to make the 
right choice of antimicrobials for treatment. 
1 An antimicrobial susceptibility test is performed for two main purposes: 
• to guide the clinician in selecting the best anti microbial agent for treating an individual patient; 
• to accumulate epidemiological information on the resistance of microorganisms of public health 
importance within the community. 
The result of the antimicrobial susceptibility test, as reported to the clinician, follows the 
classification of the microorganism into different categories of susceptibility. The Kirby-Bauer method 
and its modifications recognize three categories: 
• Susceptible. An organism is called “susceptible” to a drug when the infection caused by it is 
likely to respond to treatment with this drug, at the recommended dosage. 
• Intermediate covers two situations. It is applicable to strains that are “moderately susceptible” to an antibioti c that can therefore be 
used for treatment at a higher dosage (e.g. β-lactamase) because of its low toxicity, or because 
the antibiotic is concentrat ed in the focus of infec tion (e.g. in the urine). 
It also applies to strains that show “intermediate susceptibility”. In this situ ation, the intermediate 
category serves as a buffer zone between susceptible and resistant to a more toxic antibiotic (e.g. 
aminoglycoside) that cannot be used at a higher dosage. 
As most physicians are not familiar with the su btle, although clinically important, distinction 
between intermediate and moderate susceptib ility, many laboratories use the designation 
“intermediate” for reporting purposes. 
• Resistant. This term implies that the organism does not respond to a given drug, irrespective of 
the dosage and the location of the infection. 
In certain situations, such as for testing the response of Staphylococci to benzyl penicillin, only 
the categories “susceptible” and “resistant” (corresponding to the production of β-lactamase) are 
used. The ultimate decision to use a particular antimi crobial, and the dosage to be given will depend 
not only on the results of the su sceptibility tests, but also on th eir interpretation by the physician. 
Other factors, such as the pathogenic signi ficance of the microorganism, side-effects and 
pharmacokinetic properties of the drug, its diffus ion into and concentration at different body 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 45 
9. The physician and the laborator y should consult each other when 
deciding on the introduction of a new antimicrobial. For such a 
decision it may be pertinent to take the usage of antimicrobials in farming into account. Certain antimicr obials used as so-called “growth 
factors” in animal breeding may cause antimicrobial resistance in micro-organisms that may infect mankind but maintain their resistance to antimicrobials used for human therapy. The physician must be 
aware that the misuse and overuse of antimicrobials will promote antimicrobial resistance. 
10. The laboratory should provide a report that indicates the pathogenic 
bacteria and their antimicrobial susceptibility. The report should not mention the normal flora that was identified by culture in order to avoid misinterpretation of results. 
3.3.6 Pre- and post-analytical aspects of immunology Immunological and serological tests are increasingly used for the 
diagnosis of diseases and for monitoring the treatment or progress of a disease. Immunological tests are more expensive, and unfortunately physicians may be only marginally aware of the clinical value of these tests. This may result in serious problems ar ising from the inappropriate use of 
tests, or interpretation of the test re sults without considering the performance 
of the tests. Various factors may contribute to the difficulties of using immunological tests. • Certain immunological tests were previously designed to diagnose a disease, but today, the usefulness of these tests is no longer accepted. For example, the Widal test can be dangerously misleading and should no longer be used in clinical practice. 
• A number of diagnostic immunological reagents are not standardized. Consequently, results obtained by different test systems cannot be compared. The physician is rarely aware of these differences and conclusions are made that may have serious consequences for the 
sites, the immune status of the patient, and the st ate of liver and kidney function of the host, will 
also have to be considered. 
46 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 patient (e.g. false diagnosis of a tu mour or viral infection). This poses 
particular problems for laboratory services in developing countries. 
• In developing countries, interruption of the supply of reagents forces 
laboratories to change from one test system to another. The information is not passed on to the physician, who may come to the wrong conclusion when comparing results that were established by different test systems. 
• Certain immunological tests were developed for monitoring a disease. Some of these tests have a low di agnostic specificity; nevertheless 
they are mistakenly used for the diagnosis of a disease (e.g. certain 
tumour markers). 
• Tests that are intended serve a specific purpose are used for other purposes, and the results obtained may lead to the wrong conclusion. 
For example, certain tests for the detection of HBV surface antigen are 
used in the control of donated blood although their low diagnostic sensitivity may insufficiently indicate that the donation is not infectious. 
• Immunological reagents may be subject to cross-reactions under certain circumstances, and the results must be interpreted with caution. 
3.3.7 Validation of laboratory results All laboratory results must be validated by the laboratory from both a 
technical and a medical point of view before they are reported to the physician. The laboratory has an obliga tion to ensure that all results are 
correct within accepted limits of uncertainty. 
The technical validation of laborat ory results focuses on the exclusion 
of errors, such as: • inappropriate material provided to the laboratory for analysis 
• inappropriate handling of the material prior to and during analysis 
• inappropriate execution of measurement (including wrong calibration, use of inappropriate reagents, in appropriate measurement conditions, 
incorrect reading and calculation) 
• incorrect transcription of results. 
Laboratory services and laboratory investigations 47 
The medical validation identifies errors that may have been made 
during the pre-analytical phase at the time of collection and transport of 
specimens (which may not be under the control of the laboratory). During the medical validation the results are comp ared with the clinical state of the 
patient. The medical validation includes a plausibility control of the value of the measurement with the suspected pa thobiochemical status of a patient. 
For example, a measured serum pota ssium concentration of 12 mmol/L is 
not compatible with life. Consequently, such a result in a report is not plausible knowing that the patient is alive; obviously an error was made during sampling, transportation or storage of the specimen. The error could have been caused by prolonged stor age of the specimen prior to the 
laboratory examination or by sampling from a site where the patient was receiving a potassium-containing salt in fusion. There may also be other 
causes that explain the elevated serum potassium concentration, which was correctly measured from a technical point of view. 
A comparison of results with previous results on the same patient 
often helps to identify inappropriate procedures (e.g. use of inappropriate 
tubes for blood collection), undetected accidents during laboratory measurement (e.g. fibrin clots in serum), and errors of transcription of results. 
The importance of the information on the medical history of the 
patient for the interpretation of laborat ory observations also applies to tests 
that provide a “yes” or “no” answer. Fo r example, the following tests were 
found to be an occasionally falsely positive: • tests for antibodies against HIV and other viruses (anti-HCV , anti-rubella, anti-HA V-IgM, anti-EBV , anti-HSV) 
• tests for bacterial infections 
• tests for autoimmune antibodies 
• tests for rheumatic factors 
• hypergammaglobulinaemia. This is why it is sometimes necessar y to make an additional laboratory 
investigation using a different test principle in order to confirm that the result is truly positive. 
Approaches to clinical 
problem-solving 
Clinical problem-solving is a process of finding out what is wrong 
with a patient, starting with the patient’s presenting complaint. The stages of 
clinical problem-solving should be followed step by step, in order to arrive at 
the best possible diagnosis and to plan appropriate management. 
The sequence of events used in making a diagnosis is: 
• history-taking 
• physical examination 
• selection of laboratory tests and interpretation of results 
• use of diagnostic facilities, e.g. X-ray, ultrasound. The first step to make a diagnosis of a disease is the exploration of the 
medical history, followed by the physi cal examination of the patient. The 
second step is the ordering of diagnostic investigations. 
4.1 Medical history-taking 
The medical history consists of: 
• complaints or symptoms presented by the patient 
• further information obtained from inquiry by the clinician. 
The time needed to gather a medical history depends on the nature of the 
problem. The physician should aim to spend at least 10 minutes with every patient, but complicated problems may require longer. Physicians should familiarize themselves with local term inology used by the community to 
describe clinical conditions and diseases. Knowledge of the local dialect and 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 49 
local beliefs assists in communicating w ith patients. An interpreter may be 
In hospitals the medical history of a patient together with the 
observations that were made during the physical examination are kept on 
record. The medical doctor examining th e patient is requested to enter all 
important information into a pre-printe d record form if available. Such a 
form is useful for examining the patient in a systematic way, to follow up a 
patient during subsequent visits, and for communication with other clinical 
experts who may have inspected the patie nt from a different medical point of 
view. An example of a record form is shown in Annex 2. 
A medical history proceeds as follows: 
• history of present illness 
• systemic inquiry (review of systems) 
• past history 
• social history 
• family history 
• drug history. Questions are asked in order to expl ain the chief complaint and clarify 
the likely differential diagnoses. Where there are several symptoms, it useful to ask the order in which they occurre d. Questions should always be specific 
and useful. One of the most useful questions is “Have you ever had the same problem before?”. 
When patients complain of pain, useful questions to delineate the 
problem are: • the site (where is the pain?) 
• radiation (does it spread elsewhere?) 
• severity (how bad is it? Does it stop you carrying out normal activities?) 
• character (what is the pain like? Stabbing, burning, dull, etc?) 
• aggravating and relieving factors (what brings the pain on? What 
relieves the pain?) 
• duration of the pain (how long have you had it?). The most useful questions to ask relate to the “system” involved (see 
the sections devoted to systemic inquiry below). 
50 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 With experience, two or three specific questions will lead the clinician 
to the most likely diagnosis. The c linician will also learn which questions 
related to the other “systems” could be relevant to the patient’s problem. 
The following lists give most of the major questions that could be 
asked about a “system”. It is important that answers to all questions are 
entered into the pre-printed record fo rm. Note that the questions remain 
specific and useful in leading to a possible diagnosis. 
weight loss night sweats fever oedema enlarged lymph nodes 
• Ear, nose and throat ear pain deafness discharge from the ears tinnitus (ringing or buzzing in the ears) sore throat difficulty or pain in swallowing hoarseness of the voice pain in the face (over the sinuses) nasal discharge (runny nose) nose bleeding painful teeth soreness/ulcers of the mouth or tongue bleeding of the gums 
• Eyes loss of vision double vision eye pain itching of the eyes discharge from the eyes 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 51 
• Cardiovascular system 
central chest pain palpitations shortness of breath (on exertion, at rest, at night, lying flat) cough sputum (colour, consistency, blood-stained) swelling of the ankles (oedema) tenderness of calf or veins 
• Respiratory system chest pain (site, with inspiration) shortness of breath (at rest, exertion) cough sputum (colour, consistency, amount) wheezing 
• Gastrointestinal system vomiting (with or without blood) appetite, ability to take fluids diarrhoea or constipation (frequenc y, amount, consistency, colour, 
presence of blood or mucus) 
flatus (excessive or absent) abdominal pain (site, type, severity , aggravating/relieving factors) 
• Genitourinary system painful urination colour of urine (blood, dark) difficulty in passing urine frequent passing of small volumes of urine urinary incontinence loin pain passage of stones 
• Genitourinary system: males 
urethral discharge: colour genital ulcers 
52 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 testicular pain or swelling 
enlarged inguinal lymph nodes 
• Genitourinary system: females 
pregnancies: number, complications menstruation: regular, heavy, painful vaginal discharge: colour, irritation, smell genital ulcers enlarged inguinal lymph nodes pelvic pain 
• Endocrine system swelling of the neck body growth hair distribution polyuria (passing excessive quantities of urine) polydipsia (excessive thirst) 
• Skin, hair, nails itching, pain rash: distribution, colour, type, sensation ulcers discharge bruising, bleeding baldness hair/nail changes: shape, colour 
• Joints, muscles joints: pain, swelling, redness, heat deformity stiffness 
• Central nervous system headache visual disturbance 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 53 
photophobia 
deafness, tinnitus weakness of face, limbs (especially one-sided) difficulty in swallowing numbness, tingling (one side, “gl ove and stocking” distribution) 
difficulty speaking difficulty walking, abnormal gait control of urination or defecation convulsions coma 
• Psychiatric status depression anxiety hallucinations sleep disturbances 
• Past history previous surgical operations, and reasons previous admissions to hospital, and reasons previous accidents or injuries previous severe illnesses 
• Social history marital status religion occupation diet hobbies, other activities smoking alcohol intake recent travel 
54 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Family history 
hereditary diseases: history of illness in parents, siblings (sisters and 
brothers) and children 
infectious diseases: history of illness in those living close to the 
patient, e.g. spouse, relations, friends 
• Drug history recent or previous use of medicines including herbal remedies. 
4.2 General examination 
Every patient must have a genera l examination performed including 
examination of the head, eyes (conjunc tivae), mouth, neck, the skin and the 
extremities, all of which may provide clues to the cause of the patient’s illness. The observations of the general examination should also be entered into the pre-printed record form. A complete general examination includes the following: • general appearance (cleanliness, emaciation or obesity, marasmus, degree of illness) 
• general mood, level of consciousness, ability to walk or sit (in a child), gait, posture 
• obvious deformities hair hair colour and texture, fungal infection, loss of 
hair (alopecia) 
pallor conjunctivae, mouth and tongue, nailbeds, palms 
jaundice sclera, mouth and frenulum of the tongue 
cyanosis mouth, lips and tongue, nailbeds mouth poor teeth, oral thrush, oral ulcers, enlarged or 
inflamed tonsils, mouth opening, tongue protrusion 
state of hydration dry mucous membranes, lack of tears, loss of 
skin turgidity, sunken fontanelle 
ears discharge, external ears, ear drums 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 55 
swellings of the 
neck enlargement of the thyroid, lymph nodes 
fingers and nails clubbing, nail pitting peripheral oedema pitting of the skin peripheral skin lesions rashes, ulcers 
• vital signs: temperature, pulse rate, respiration rate, blood pressure 
• body weight. 
4.2.1 Respiratory system The respiratory system is examined with the patient sitting up, or with 
a child sitting on its mother’s lap. The patient should remove the shirt completely for the examination of the chest. Examine both the anterior and posterior parts of the chest; there is more posterior lung area available for 
examination than anterior. 
• Inspection : shape and movement of the chest: symmetrical/ 
asymmetrical, deformities. Respiratory rate. 
• Character of respirations : wheezing (delayed expiration); respiratory 
distress: flaring of the alae nasae, use of accessory muscles, chest 
indrawing (suprasternal/clavicular, intercostal, subcostal); Kussmaul 
breathing (air hunger); Cheyne–Stokes breathing: periods of deep breathing alternating with apnoea; finger clubbing. 
• Palpation : trachea central or deviated, chest expansion equal or 
asymmetrical on both sides, tenderness, vocal fremitus (feeling while the patient speaks). 
• Percussion : resonant (normal); hyper-resonant, dull, stony dull. 
56 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Auscultation : normal (vesicular) breath sounds, reduced or absent 
breath sounds, bronchial breathing, rhonchi, crackles, pleural rub, 
vocal resonance (auscultating while the patient speaks). 
Note: always compare the two sides of the body in your examination. 
4.2.2 Cardiovascular system The cardiovascular system is examin ed with the patient lying on 
his/her back on a couch, propped up at a 45° angle. A child can be sitting on its mother’s lap. 
• Inspection : cyanosis, finger clubbing, position and character of apex 
beat, redness of veins in legs, jugular venous pulse rate. 
• Palpation : rate and rhythm of pulse, position and character of apex 
beat, jugular venous pressure, thrills (palpable murmurs), peripheral 
(or sacral) oedema, tenderness of calf veins. 
• Percussion : the heart borders can be percussed to determine the size of 
the heart. 
• Auscultation : heart sounds I and II; murmurs (systolic or diastolic); 
extra sounds, pericardial rub, bruits over arteries (carotid, aortic). 
Listen over the four valves of the heart to see where murmurs are loudest: mitral: left fifth intercostal space in the mid-clavicular line aortic: right second intercostal space adjacent to the sternum pulmonary: left second intercostal space adjacent to the sternum tricuspid: right fourth intercostal space adjacent to the sternum. 
4.2.3 Abdominal system The abdomen is examined with the patient lying flat on his/her back 
on a couch, with arms at the sides and knees slightly flexed. Ask the patient to relax and breathe gently. Small children can be examined lying on the 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 57 
mother’s lap. Hernias are best examin ed with the patient standing up and 
asking the patient to cough or strain. 
• Inspection : distension, movement with respiration, visible peristalsis, 
scars, striae, dilated veins, umbilical hernia, enlarged liver or spleen, 
• Palpation : tenderness, rigidity, organs (liver, spleen, kidneys), masses, 
hernias (umbilical, inguinal, femoral), direction of blood flow in 
dilated veins, thrills (arterio-venous fistulae). 
• Percussion : extent of liver and spleen; differentiation of enlarged 
spleen from enlarged kidney; detection of peritoneal fluid (ascites), shifting dullness. Always percuss from resonant to dull. 
• Auscultation : bowel sounds (normal, increased, silent), arterial bruits 
(aorta, renal arteries), continuous murmurs (arterio-venous fistulae). 
Always compare the two sides of the body in your examination. 
• Differentiation of spleen from kidney 
On inspiration, the spleen moves diagonally down, the kidney moves vertically down. The spleen has a notch, the kidney does not have a notch. The spleen is dull to percussion; the kidney is resonant to percussion. The upper part of the spleen cannot be palpated; the upper part of the kidney can be palpated (in slim patients). 
• Rectal examination Rectal examination should be performed in cases of anal irritation or 
pain, where there is blood or mucus co ating the stool, and in patients with 
prostatic symptoms. The examination is performed wearing examination 
gloves and with the patient lying curled up in the left lateral position. 
58 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Inspection : peri-anal skin, fissures, haemorrhoids, ulcers, polyps. 
Inspection of finger after withdrawal : colour of faeces, blood, pus, 
Palpation (with lubricated, gloved finger) : tenderness, tone of anal 
sphincter, faecal masses, rectal masses, tenderness, prostate for hardness or irregularity. 
4.2.4 Genitourinary system Wear examination gloves and have all instruments, a light or torch, 
and sterile swabs ready to hand. 
Male patients 
• Inspection : distribution of pubic hair, appearance of penis, presence of 
prepuce, site of external urethral orifice, discharge (colour, consistency), ulcers, scrotum for redness or swelling, oedema of skin, ulceration, inguinal swellings. 
• Palpation : withdraw prepuce to examine for ulcers, massage for 
discharge, presence of both testes in the scrotum, scrotal or testicular swellings, trans-illuminati on, inguinal swellings. 
Female patients 
The patient is best examined lying flat on her back with legs drawn up 
and knees apart. Cover the lower abdomen with a sheet. Vaginal examination 
requires the presence of a chaperone. 
• Inspection : vulva for ulcers, swellings, vaginal discharge (colour, 
consistency), urethral discharge. 
Inspection using a vaginal speculum This procedure should be performed to examine the vagina and cervix. 
Use a sterile speculum lubricated with water only (antiseptics may 
destroy pathogenic organisms). Insert the speculum sideways into the lower part of the vagina. 
Rotate the blades through 90° so that they are lying flat anteriorly and posteriorly. 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 59 
Gently open the blades and identify the cervix. 
Tighten the screw to keep the speculum in place. 
Note ulcers, irregularity, bleeding of the cervix. Observe the source (cervical, vaginal) of the discharge. Note colour, consistency of the discharge. Collect an endocervical swab (ECS) from the cervical canal. Collect a high vaginal swab (HVS) from the posterior fornix. Gently withdraw the speculum. Ob serve discharge on the speculum. 
• Palpation (using index and middle fingers of right hand) : direction of 
cervix, irregularity, tenderness on movement. 
• Palpation (bimanually) : size, position of uterus, each lateral fornix for 
tenderness and swellings of fallopian tubes or ovaries, pouch of Douglas inferiorly. 
4.2.5 Musculoskeletal system (muscles, joints and back) 
• Inspection : swelling, redness, position of joints. Muscle wasting, 
fibrillation. Posture upright, anteriorly, posteriorly and laterally. Spinal movements during flexion, extension, lateral flexion and rotation. Gait 
during walking. Walking on tip-toes and heels. 
• Palpation : tenderness, range of motion, cr epitus, fluctuation. Straight 
leg raising and ankle dorsiflexion. Spine for local tenderness. 
Note: always compare the two sides of the body in your examination. 
4.2.6 Skin Typical features on the skin very often provide the first information on 
a disease in a patient. The features may be caused by an infection (bacterial, 
viral, fungal, protozoan), metabolic disorder, malignant disease or exposure 
to harmful agents (allergens, toxins). 
60 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Inspection : rashes/ulcers; type, site, distribution, arrangement, shape, 
colour, inflammation, swelling, discharge, oedema, excoriations, 
eczema (dry, seborrhoeic), exanth ema, pustules, pyodermia, bullae, 
gangrene, creeping eruptions, abscesses, cyanosis, erysipelas, erythema, alopecia, herpes, plaques, vitiligo, hyperpigmentation, urticaria, burns, tumours, cysts, atheroma, fibroma, haemangioma, 
lipoma, fibroma, keloids, warts, condyloma, naevi; insects and microorganisms: ticks, lice, mites, tinea (fungi), larvae. 
• Palpation : rashes/ulcers; tenderness, anaesthesia, raised edges. 
4.2.7 Endocrine system 
• Inspection : obesity; acromegalic face, hands and feet; increased water 
intake; weight loss; weight distribution; exophthalmos; lid lag; thyroid swelling; resting tremor; distribution of body hair; breast mass, indrawn nipple. 
• Palpation : texture of hair and skin; pulse rate; blood pressure; thyroid 
swelling; breast mass; abdominal mass. 
4.2.8 Nervous system 
• Mental functions : appearance, cooperation, orientation, memory, 
emotional state, intelligence, conversation, speech, level of consciousness. 
• Cranial nerves 
I Olfactory sense of smell II Optic nerve visual acuity, visual fields, optic fundus III Oculomotor eye movements, nystagmus, squint, pupils (size, 
light, accommodation) 
IV Trochlea control of superior oblique muscle that moves the 
Approaches to clinical problem-solving 61 
V Trigeminal sensation of face, cornea, anterior ⅔ of tongue; 
open mouth, clench jaw, jaw movements from 
side to side 
VI Abducens motor nerve for the lateral rectus muscle that 
moves the eye outward 
VII Facial taste (anterior ⅔ of tongue), facial movements 
VIII Auditory hearing, balance IX Glossopharyngeal sensation, taste to posterior ⅔ tongue, 
swallowing, 
X Vagus movement of palate, uvula, pharyngeal reflex XI Accessory sternomastoid, trapezius (turn head, shrug 
shoulders) 
XII Hypoglossal tongue movements 
• Motor functions : muscle bulk, muscle tone (flaccid, spastic/clasp-
knife, cog-wheel, lead-pipe), muscle power, tendon reflexes, 
abdominal reflexes, plantar reflex. 
• Sensation : light touch, pain (pin prick), temperature, position sense, 
vibration, recognition of size, shape, weight. 
• Coordination : finger to nose, heel to knee, standing with eyes closed 
(Romberg sign). 
• Gait: spastic, stamping, reeling, high-stepping, scissors. 
• Involuntary movements : epilepsy, tremor, choreiform, athetosis. 
• Meningeal irritation : neck stiffness, Kernig si gn (passively extending 
the knee with the hip fully flexed). 
• Raised intracranial pressure : bulging fontanelle, papilloedema. 
Note: always compare the two sides of the body in your examination. 
Examination of clinical 
symptoms and signs 
Observations that commonly present in medical practice and ways of 
approaching the diagnosis in a systematic way are discussed in the following 
sections: • fever 
• anaemia (pallor) 
• diarrhoea 
• cough and shortness of breath 
• skin diseases (rashes and ulcers) 
• jaundice 
• sexually transmitted infections 
• coma or altered consciousness 
• acute and non-acute abdominal pain 
• accidents and injuries 
• complicated pregnancy 
• malignancy. Chapter 6 discusses the contribution of diagnostic services in the 
control of epidemics. Chapter 7 c onsiders noncommunicable diseases. The 
signs and symptoms of common diseases and disorders and the laboratory test that should be considered, are summarized in Table 5.1 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 63 
Table 5.1 Use of essential laboratory tests 
Clinical condition Investigation required Specimen Technique 
Anaemia Haemoglobin estimation or 
haematocrit 
Peripheral blood film Sickle-cell screen Capillary or anticoagulated 
venous blood Haemoglobin 
Reverse Field stain Differential blood film Sodium metabisulfite slide 
Anaemia, weight loss 
Abdominal pain Stool for ova and larvae Blood in stool, blood 
haemoglobin Stool Direct saline preparation 
Formol–ether concentration method and microscopy 
Hb, haemocult 
Fever, mental confusion, 
severe headache, signs of meningitis, unconsciousness Cerebrospinal fluid for bacteria, parasites, viruses
Blood for bacteria, 
parasites Cerebrospinal fluid 
Fresh blood Microscopy and culture Differential blood cell count Cerebrospinal fluid blood 
cell count 
Special viral tests 
Fever, arthritis/ arthralgia Total and differential white 
blood cell count 
Blood film for malaria 
Sickle-cell anaemia Bacterial and viral 
infections Capillary or anticoagulated 
venous blood Improved Neubauer chamber 
Reverse Field stain Blood microscopy, 
serological test, sickle cell test 
Fever, lymphangitis, lymphadenitis Blood film for microfilariae, white blood cell microscopy 
Lymph knot puncture Capillary or anticoagulated 
venous blood Direct examination 
Knott concentration 
Field stain Serological tests for 
toxoplasmosis, etc. 
Fever, lymphadenopathy, apathy, skin oedema, headache, coma Blood film, lymph gland puncture, subcutaneous (chancre) fluid, for Trypanosoma Capillary or anticoagulated venous blood 
Lymph gland fluid Subcutaneous fluid Direct microscopy Buffy coat microscopy Field stain Reverse Field stain 
Fever, weight loss, 
splenomegaly Blood cell count; 
WBC microscopy Leishmania Skin biopsy Reverse Field stain 
64 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.1 Use of essential laboratory tests (continued) 
 Clinical condition Investigation required Specimen Technique 
Relapsing fever Blood film for Borrelia 
Plasmodium vivax, P. 
ovale, P. malaria 
WBC count, WBC 
microscopy, Capillary or anticoagulated venous blood Field stain 
Reverse Field stain 
discharge/urethritis Urethral discharge for Neisseria gonorrhoeae , 
First voided urine for 
Trichomonas vaginalis (in 
Urine for glucose, bacteria, 
protein, haemoglobin 
Midstream urine for 
microscopy Urethral swab or urethral smear 
First voided urine Fresh midstream urine Gram stain Bacterial culture Direct microscopic 
examination of sediment 
Urine dipsticks 
Colorimetric or strips Microalbuminuria Direct microscopy Gram stain of sediment Bacterial culture 
Haematuria Urine for Schistosome ova 
(in endemic areas) Urine for bacteria Terminal urine Microscopy of urine 
Genital ulcer Exudate for Treponema 
Lymphogranuloma 
Haemophilus ducreyi Exudate from genital ulcer 
Chlamydia trachomatis Dark-field examination Bacterial culture 
Vaginal discharge High vaginal swab for 
Trichomonas vaginalis , 
Candida albicans and 
bacterial vaginosis Endocervical swab for 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae , 
pus cells High vaginal swab 
Endocervical swab Direct saline and 10% 
potassium hydroxide preparations 
Gram stain 
 Diarrhoea/dysentery 
 Stool for vibrios 
Stool for blood cells and 
protozoa and bacteria Fresh stool (within 1 hour of collection) Direct examination 
Dark-field examination Direct saline, eosin 
preparations, 
Stool cultures 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 65 
Table 5.1 Use of essential laboratory tests (concluded) 
Clinical condition Investigation required Specimen Technique 
Fibrous skin nodules, 
blindness Skin snip for onchocerca microfilariae Skin snip Direct examination 
Skin ulcer Skin smear for acid-fast 
Skin exudate for 
Treponema pallidum 
Syphilis screening test 
Syphilis confirmatory test Tropical ulcer Skin slit smear 
Exudate from skin lesion Serum Modified Ziehl–Neelsen 
Skin smear for bacteria 
(Mycobacterium ulcerans) 
Dark field microscopy 
VDRL screening test Confirmatory test 
Fungal infection of skin, 
nails and hair Skin, hair, nails for fungus Skin scrapings, hair, nail 
clippings 10% potassium hydroxide preparation 
Pre-eclampsia Urine for protein Random urine Urine dipsticks 
Chronic cough with 
expectorate Sputum, gastric washings for acid-fast bacilli, Paragonimus westermani Sputum 
Gastric washings Ziehl–Neelsen stain 
microscopy 
Antenatal screening Haemoglobin estimation 
Syphilis screening test 
Urine for protein and 
glucose Capillary or anticoagulated 
venous blood 
Random urine Haemoglobin VDRL screening test Urine dipsticks 
Eye infection in the elderly Chlamydia trachomatis Conjunctival swab Gram stain 
Eye infection in the 
newborn Conjunctival swab for Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 
chlamydia, pus cells Conjunctival swab Gram stain 
In someone with good health, the bod y temperature is maintained by 
the thermoregulatory centre in the br ain within a narrow range, despite 
extremes of environmental conditions and physical activity: 36.5–37.5 °C 
(oral). Normal body temperature varies throughout the day (diurnal 
variation) and is higher in the eveni ng. Fever is defined as body temperature 
above normal. 
Substances called pyrogens , which are derived mainly from viruses 
and bacteria, reset the thermoregulatory centre’s “thermostat” at a higher level. During infection, heat is gene rated by shivering (chills, rigours) and 
66 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 lost through sweating and dilation of peripheral blood vessels (warm 
extremities). 
5.1.1 Types of fever 
• Acute : for a short time. 
• Chronic : more than two weeks duration. 
• Intermittent : falls to normal in regular periodical intervals. 
• Persistent : without significant diurnal variation. 
• Relapsing : short febrile periods between one or several days of normal 
temperature. 
5.1.2 Causes of fever 
The most common cause of fever is infection. Infection may be due to 
organisms such as viruses, bacteria, fungi or parasites. Fever may also be due to inflammatory processes in the body. Common and important conditions that are associated with feve r, and their causative agents, include 
the following. 
Infectious fever 
• Viral infections 
− Main clinical manifestation : tonsillitis, laryngitis, pharyngitis, 
tracheitis, laryngotracheobronchitis (LTB or croup), bronchitis, bronchiolitis, pneumonia. 
− Main viral agents : measles, mumps, chicken pox, haemorrhagic 
fevers, respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, adenovirus, influenza virus, mumps virus, varicella-zoster virus, vaccinia, coxsackievirus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis virus (HA V , HBV , HCV), flavivirus. 
• Bacterial infections 
− Main clinical manifestation: tonsillitis, otitis media, sinusitis, 
dental abscess, bronchitis, bronchiectasis, pneumonia, lung abscess, urinary tract infection, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), cellulitis/ulcers, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, meningitis, secondary syphilis, typhoid (enteric fever), 
enterocolitis,, relapsing fever, 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 67 
− Main bacterial agents: plague, group A β-haemolytic 
streptococci, Streptococcus pneumoniae , Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis , Haemophilus influenzae , Staphylococcus aureus , 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae , Klebsiella pneumoniae , Yersinia 
pestis , Escherichia coli , Enterococcus faecalis , Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa , Neisseria meningitidis /gonorrhoeae , Treponema 
pallidum , Salmonella typhi , Salmonella paratyphi , Shigella 
spp., Campylobacter jejuni , Brucella abortus /suis/melitensis , 
Bacillus anthracis , Borrelia recurrentis /duttoni . 
• Rickettsial infections : typhus, fièvre boutonneuse. 
• Fungal infections : meningitis ( Cryptococcus neoformans, 
Aspergillus ). 
• Protozoan infections : malaria ( Plasmodium spp.), trypanosomiasis 
(Trypanosoma spp.), visceral leishmaniasis ( Leishmania donovani ). 
• Helminthic infections : schistosomiasis ( Schistosoma mansoni , 
S. haematobium ), filariasis. 
Noninfectious fever 
• Inflammatory diseases : rheumatoid arthritis, auto-immune diseases. 
• Malignancy : lymphoma. 
• Injury : crushing injury. 
• Acute haemolytic episodes : sickle-cell crisis, thalassaemia. 
• Thrombosis : pulmonary embolus, myocardial infarction (heart attack). 
• Drug reactions . 
• Allergic reaction . 
Often, the history and physical examination of the patient give a hint 
to the cause of the fever, although some times its origin cannot be identified 
(pyrexia of unknown origin; see below) . Laboratory investigations depend 
on the presenting complaint of the patie nt and the severity of the illness. 
Questions should be asked in order to find any localized cause of the fever. The following information and investigations may be pertinent. 
68 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
duration timing night sweats enlarged lymph glands sore throat, runny nose ear pain, sinus pain painful teeth, facial oedema headache, photophobia, vomiting convulsions, altered consciousness cough, sputum, chest pain, shortness of breath, wheezing diarrhoea (blood, mucus), abdominal pain painful urination, haematuria, loin pain skin rash, ulcer joint swelling, joint pain, bone pain bleeding from mucous membranes into skin drug ingestion. 
• Physical examination rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate (exception: slow pulse in typhoid 
pallor, jaundice stiff neck, bulging fontanelle, photophobia, Kernig sign red throat, pus on tonsils, red bulging eardrums, sinus tenderness 
decayed teeth respiratory distress (use of accessory muscles, chest indrawing, 
grunting, nasal flaring), rhonchi, bronchial breathing, pleural rub 
abdominal tenderness, liver or spl een enlargement, masses, ascites 
loin/pelvic tenderness skin rash, ulcer, lymphangitis swollen tender joints bone tenderness, swelling bleeding, petechiae lymphadenopathy. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 69 
• Laboratory investigations 
haemoglobin total and differential blood cell count blood slide for parasites and Borrelia 
sputum for acid-fast bacilli fresh stool for pus cells, red cells, ova midstream urine (MSU) for pus cells, bacteria coagulation tests (in suspected bleeding disorder) cerebrospinal fluid for white cells (total and differential), bacteria, 
fungi, protozoa 
microscopic examination of body fluids for white cells (total and 
differential), bacteria, fungi 
lymph gland puncture for trypanosomes, acid-fast bacilli 
syphilis screening test. 
• Diagnostic imaging chest X-ray for pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis facial X-ray for chronic sinusitis bone/joint X-ray for osteomyelitis, septic arthritis ultrasound for amoebic liver abscess, extrapulmonary tuberculosis, 
septic arthritis. 
5.1.3 Acute fever Acute fever has a duration of less than two weeks and is most often 
caused by bacterial, viral or protozoan infection. In tropical climates patients 
and small children may often suffer fro m fever due to dehydration. Rarely 
fever may be caused by an allergy. A meticulous interview should aim to identify a possible risk of infection of the patient (e.g. intake of infected milk, water or food; insect or animal bite). Acute fever may be diagnosed according to the flowchart in Figure 5.1. 
Look for signs of localized infection: 
• jaundice 
• red throat/pus on tonsils 
• bulging red ear drums 
70 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Acute fever
less than two weeks’ duration
Thick blood film for parasites Symptoms and/or signs of localized infection
parasitespresentOther bloodparasites presentBorreliatrypanosomesmicrofilariaeNegative No Yes
Patient is not
severely illPatient isseverely ill
Total white cell count
Differential white cell countRepeat thick blood film
NeutrophiliaLaboratory
examination
stool, urine, CSFCount trophozoites
against WBCPlasmodium
falciparum
tonsillitis
pneumonia*
dental abscess
septic arthritis
meningitis
septic ulcer
otitis media
osteomyelitis*
measlesTreat formalariaTreatappropriatelyTreatsymptomaticallyContinue lookingfor the cause
Reexamine patient
Repeat thick bloodfilm after 12, 24, 48hours; serologicaltests
Diseases includesepticaemiarelapsing feveramoebic liver abscess*severe malariaother systemic bacterial infectionrickettsiaDiseases includetyphoid*viral infectionNo
*Diagnostic ultrasound and/or X-ray indicated 
Figure 5.1 Flowchart for the diagnosis of chronic fever 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 71 
• decayed teeth, facial swelling 
• lung crepitations, bronchial breathing 
• abdominal/loin tenderness, enlarged organs 
• joint/bone swelling, heat, tenderness 
• skin rash, ulcer, bleeding 
• lymphadenopathy 
• neck stiffness, bulging fontanelle. 
5.1.4 Chronic fever 
Chronic fever is fever of more th an two weeks’ duration. Although 
chronic fever may occasionally be observed after microbial infection, more often patents suffer from a chronic disease (such as rheumatic fever) or a malignant disease. Usually temperature elevation is not as high as in acute fever. By contrast with acute fever, it is less easy to directly identify the causative agent if the fever is of microbial origin. Therefore specific 
serological tests may help to establish a diagnosis. The flowchart in Figure 5.2 provides guidance in the diagnosis of chronic fever. 
Pyrexia of unknown origin is fever of >38.3 °C on several occasions 
that lasts more than three weeks’ duration and no diagnosis can be 
established. 
5.1.5 Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
Total and differential white blood cell count 
The total white cell count (WBC) does not provide a diagnosis, but 
provides the physician with an indication of the type of infection in a patient. 
Causes of an increased white count in clude most bacterial infections (e.g. 
septic abortion, septicaemia, pneumonia, bacterial meningitis), parasitic 
infections and allergic reactions, inflammation and leukaemias. Certain 
bacterial infections, such as typhoid fever ( Salmonella typhi) and brucellosis, 
cause a reduction in the white count. Certain drugs may also reduce the 
white blood cell count, e.g. chlorampheni col, anti-tuberculous drugs. It is 
important to remember that the normal reference interval of white blood cell concentrations varies with age of the patient. Newborns normally have white 
blood cell levels that are far above the normal WBC levels in adults. 
72 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 The total white cell count must be made at the same time as the 
differential count so that the actual number of each type of cell can be 
calculated. This provides the clinician with very useful information. For 
example, an increase in lymphocytes suggests a viral infection and an increase in neutrophils suggests a bact erial infection. An increase in 
eosinophils suggests a parasitic infection or allergies. An increase in monocytes suggests tuberculosis, brucellosis, chronic inflammation, mononucleosis or tumours. 
The flow chart on chronic fever (Figure 5.2) suggests differential 
diagnoses for different white cell count types. 
The diagnosis of typhoid fever is diff icult to confirm in the peripheral 
clinic, where blood cultures (the only exact test for typhoid fever) are usually not available. The diagnosis is made using a combination of the clinical 
symptoms (fever, abdominal pain, headache), signs (slow pulse rate, 
splenomegaly) and the total white blood count (neutropenia and eosinopenia). The Widal test is misleading and should no longer be used. Patients without fever are not suffering from typhoid fever (although they may be carriers of Salmonella typhi ), and the Widal test cannot be 
interpreted in these patients. Carriers can only be diagnosed by culture of the 
stool and urine. 
Thick blood film (blood slide) 
The thick blood film is examined by microscopy for the detection of 
blood parasites. A thick blood film should be ordered even if the patient has 
already taken antimalarial drugs. It may take two or three days after effective 
treatment for the blood film to become negative for malaria parasites. If 
treatment is ineffective, th e blood film remains positive. 
Plasmodium trophozoites are the activ e form of malaria infection in 
blood and are present when the patient has symptoms of malaria. If trophozoites of P. falciparum malaria are detected, the level of parasitaemia 
should be measured by counting the trophozoites against 200 white blood 
cells in a thick blood film. Th is is important in order to: 
• measure the severity of the infection 
• monitor the response to treatment 
• recognize resistance to treat ment as soon as possible. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 73 
Chronic fever
more than two weeks’ duration
NeutrophiliaNeutropeniaNormal whitecell countEosinophilia
Diseases includedeep sepsis, e.g. abscess
amoebic liver abscess
relapsing fever
cholangitisSBEDiseases includemalariabrucellosisdisseminated tuberculosis
visceral leishmaniasis
HIV, EBV, CMVDiseases includelocalized tuberculosissecondary syphilis
brucellosistrypanosomiasis
toxoplasmosisDiseases includeinfection with (visceral larva migrans)nematodes Schistosoma mansoniWuchereria bancroftiStrongyloides stercoralisToxocara canans
Blood film forspp.
BorreliaBlood film for malaria
Splenetic puncture for LD bodiesHIV antibody screen*Syphilis screening positive
Blood film/lymph gland
puncture for trypanosomesStool for ova and larvae
Blood film formicrofilariae
Treat appropriately or refer for further investigation and management
*Test may not be available. 
Figure 5.2 Flowchart for the diagnosis of chronic fever 
74 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Thin blood films are used to confirm malaria parasite species, as the 
appearance (morphology) of parasites is better preserved. Other blood 
parasites, such as trypanosomes, Borrelia and microfilariae, may also be 
seen on thin blood films. 
It is possible that a blood film may be negative in a patient who has 
malaria. If the parasite count is very low, parasites may be missed on the 
blood film. In addition, patients with severe (cerebral) malaria may have 
negative blood films because the late forms of P. falciparum (schizonts) 
become fixed to the capillary walls of internal organs (such as the brain). Therefore, the treatment of severely ill patients for malaria may be justified even when the blood slide is negative. In patients who are not severely ill, the blood slide may be repeated two or three times, in order to confirm the 
diagnosis. If the blood slide still remains negative, it is unlikely the patient 
has malaria. 
Gametocytes seen in the blood film are not a cause of fever. 
Gametocytes are the sexual form of the malaria parasite and are not active until they are taken up by a biting mosquito. Gametocytes appear after untreated or poorly treated malaria inf ections and may persist in the blood 
for up to five weeks. If the patient has fever and gametocytes are seen, look for another cause of fever, such as tropho zoites in the blood, or another cause 
of fever altogether, e.g. otitis media. 
Malaria has no specific symptoms and signs to distinguish it from 
other febrile illnesses. It is therefore not possible to make a diagnosis of malaria on clinical grounds alone. Th e diagnosis of malaria must be 
confirmed by demonstrating the presence of parasites in blood. “Clinical malaria” is not a recognized medical entity and has resulted in a great 
overdiagnosis of malaria infection. This problem has contributed to the increasing resistance of malaria parasites to treatment drugs. 
Counting malaria parasites 
Counting malaria parasites agains t 200 white blood cells is the 
recommended method for measuring parasite density in a thick blood film. 
Other methods, e.g. the plus (+) system, or using the terminologies “mild”, “moderate” or “severe”, are not r ecommended because these methods are 
based on the opinion of the observer and are affected by the thickness of the 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 75 
blood film. For example, two thick films prepared from the same blood 
sample could be prepared differently so that one film is spread more thinly 
than the other. In the thinner blood fi lm, there will “appear” to be fewer 
malaria parasites. This could mislead the clinician into believing that the 
parasite count is decreasing and the tr eatment is effective, which could lead 
to a dangerous management decision for the patient. 
In malaria infection white cell count is used as a marker against which 
to measure the rise and fall in the parasite count by microscopy. A comparison with red blood cell count is obsolete, because red cell counting by microscopy is far too imprecise. 
Table 5.2 illustrates how the parasite count can be used in clinical 
When blood cells are counted using an automated cell counter, the 
count of parasite infected red blood cells per 1000 red blood cells provides a 
more accurate estimate, since the assumption must not be made that the white blood cells remain constant in patients suffering from malaria. 
Parasite counting is only used in P falciparum infections. In other 
malaria infections, parasite counts ar e too low for counting to be of any 
value. In addition, drug resistance is not such a major problem as in P 
falciparum infections. Other parasites, such as Trypanosoma , Borrelia and 
microfilariae, are never counted. 
Table 5.2 Parasite count during malaria infection 
Day 0 Day 3 Day 7 Day 14 Assessment 
680. 160 0 0 Good response to therapy 
790 280 176 0 Parasites not cleared by Day 7; change 
to second-line therapy 
520. 60 490 Resistance to therapy; change drug 
2460 2536 2795 Resistance to therapy; change drug 
76 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Lymph gland puncture 
Lymph glands are enlarged in the chronic form of trypanosome 
infection and in tuberculosis infecti on and also some malignant diseases. In 
developing countries, lymph gland puncture is mainly performed to detect 
Trypanosoma gambiense if none are seen in a thick blood film and for 
tuberculosis. The fluid is examined using a wet preparation technique and 
staining as for a thin blood film for trypanosomes, and using the Ziehl–Neelsen staining technique for acid-fast bacilli. 
Cerebrospinal fluid and other body fluids 
Simple tests on cerebrospinal fluid and other body fluids, e.g. joint 
fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal (ascitic) fluid, are extremely useful in the 
preliminary diagnosis of meningitis and other infections. Macroscopic 
appearance is vital: if the fluid is cloudy, there is likely to be infection present. 
Cerebrospinal fluid is one of the mo st urgent samples to be examined 
in the laboratory. Before collection of cerebrospinal fluid and other body fluids the laboratory should be informed in advance. 
The total white cell count in body fluids other than blood is normally 
fewer than 5 WBC/mm
3 (fewer than 30 WBC/mm3 in neonates). An 
increased neutrophil count suggests bacter ial infection, while an increased 
lymphocyte count suggests a viral infection or chronic infection, e.g. tuberculosis. In cerebrospinal fluid, th e expected results in common forms of 
meningitis are listed in Table 5.3. Common and less common bacterial pathogens responsible for mening itis are listed in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.3 WBC in cerebrospinal fluid of patients suffering from 
Cerebrospinal fluid-
WBC count/mm3 Predominant WBC type Type of meningitis 
500–2000 Neutrophils Bacterial 
50–500 Lymphocytes Tuberculous 
20–500 Lymphocytes Viral 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 77 
Table 5.4 Bacteria causing meningitis in adults and infants 
Patient group Common 
pathogens Gram stain 
reaction Less common pathogens Gram stain reaction 
Neonates E. coli 
streptococcus Gram-negative 
Gram-positive 
monocytogenes 
S. pneumoniae 
Pseudomonas 
St. aureus Gram-positive 
coccobacillus 
Gram-positive 
Gram-negative 
Gram-positive 
Infants and children H. influenzae 
 N. meningitidis 
S. pneumoniae Gram-negative 
Gram-negative 
intracellular 
diplococcus 
Gram-positive 
coccus St. aureus 
Gram-negative 
bacilli, e.g. E. coliGram-positive 
Gram-negative 
Adults N. meningitidis 
S. pneumoniae Gram-negative 
intracellular 
diplococcus 
Gram-positive 
monocytogenes 
St. aureus 
Gram-negative 
bacilli, e.g. E. coliGram-positive 
coccobacillus 
Gram-positive 
Gram-negative 
If antibiotic treatment has already been started, Gram stain may be 
negative. It may be possible to identify the causative agent using 
commercially prepared latex agglutination tests. However, these are very 
expensive. 
In general, an increase in protei n indicates an infection. Increased 
protein may also indicate blockage of the spinal canal or a tumour. The blood sugar must always be tested at the same time. Normal cerebrospinal fluid 
78 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 glucose is approximately 70% of the blood glucose level. A reduced glucose 
level indicates bacterial infection. 
In endemic areas cerebrospinal fluid must always be examined in 
trypanosome infection to differentiate early from late infection. This has 
important implications for drug choice and management. In these cases, an 
increase in leukocyte count and protein level may also be considered as an indication of cerebrospinal fluid involvement. 
In patients with neurological comp lications in relapsing fever, 
Borrelia organisms may be seen in the cerebrospinal fluid deposit stained 
with a Romanowsky stain. 
5.1.6 HIV infection 
Infection with the human immunodefici ency virus (HIV) is a cause of 
persistent fever (> one month)—one of the features of acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Other features of HIV infection include generalised lymphadenopathy, oral-pharyngeal candidiasis, recurrent bacterial infections (pneumonia, me ningitis, septic arthritis, impetigo, 
osteomyelitis, etc), tuberculosis, chroni c diarrhoea, central nervous system 
disease, skin rash (impetigo, eczema, ge neralized pruritic dermatitis), Kaposi 
sarcoma and failure to thrive (in children). The diagnosis of HIV infection is made using an HIV screening test to de tect antibodies to HIV in serum. In an 
individual with no symptoms and si gns of AIDS, two tests employing 
different principles are carried out to confirm the diagnosis. In patients with 
clinical criteria for AIDS, a single test is sufficient. The HIV test may be 
negative in the early stages of the di sease, before antibodies have developed 
(window period). The test may also be negative in the very late stages of the disease, when the immune system is unable to produce antibodies. 
Children born to HIV infected mothers may have a positive HIV test 
up to 18 months of age due to the pre sence of maternal antibodies, even if 
the child is not infected. Children with symptoms and signs of AIDS most likely have HIV infection. Children of more than 18 months of age with a positive HIV test have HIV infection. 
The staging of HIV infection is made using a combination of clinical 
and laboratory criteria. The 1993 revised Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) classification is given below. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 79 
categories Clinical category 
CD4 count/ µL A 
Asymptomatic, 
acute primary 
infection, persistent generalized 
lymphadenopathy B 
Symptomatic, not A 
or C, indicative of 
defective cell-
mediated immunity C 
AIDS indicator 
conditions 
1 ≥ 500 A1 A2 A3 
3 < 200 C1 C2 C3 
CD4 counts: should be based on the lowest recorded accurate CD4 count, not 
necessarily the most recent one. Clinical categories: apply to adults (> 13 years) with documented HIV infection. 
Once a category C condition has occurred, the patient remains in category C. Shaded areas: AIDS. 
Clinical conditions 
Category A 
Acute HIV infection (fever, joint pains , generalised lymphadenopathy, maculopapular 
Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy 
80 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Category B 
Oral candidiasis 
Frequent vaginal/vulval candidiasis 
Persistent fever Persistent diarrhoea 
Herpes zoster (more than 1 episode/more than one dermatome) 
Cervical abnormalities/cervical cancer 
Pelvic inflammatory disease/tubo-ovarian abscess 
Peripheral neuropathy 
Category C 
Opportunistic infection Malignancy 
Candida infection of oesophagus, trachea, bronchi, 
Persistent diarrhoea due to Cryptosporidium, 
Isospora Cytomegalovirus infection 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia 
Recurrent bacterial pneumonia 
Recurrent Salmonella septicaemia 
Toxoplasmosis brain abscess Cryptococcus neoformans meningitis 
Herpes simplex extensive skin infection or involving 
lungs/oesophagus 
Mycobacterium avium complex infection Invasive cervical cancer 
Kaposi sarcoma Burkitt lymphoma 
Non-Hodgkins lymphoma 
HIV wasting syndrome (weight loss > 10% body weight) 
HIV-related encephalopathy 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 81 
The 1994 revised Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
classification for children less than 13 years of age is given below. HIV 
infected children are cla ssified according to their immunological status 
(based on CD4 counts) or their clinical status. 
CD4 counts 
Immunological 
category < 1 year 1–5 years 6–12 years 
 / µL % /µL % / µL % 
1 no immunosuppression 1500 25 1000 25 500 25 
2 moderate immunosuppression 750–1499 15–24 500–
3 severe immunosuppression <750 <15 <500 <15 <200 <15 
Clinical category 
Category N: asymptomatic 
No signs and symptoms considered to be the results of HIV infection 
Only ONE of the conditions listed in Category A 
Category A: Mildly symptomatic 
Lymphadenopathy (> 0.5 cm at more than one site – bilateral = one site) 
Hepatomegaly Splenomegaly Dermatitis Parotitis Recurrent upper respiratory tract in fection, sinusitis, otitis media 
82 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Category B: moderately symptomatic 
Anaemia (Hb < 80g/L); neutropenia (< 1000/ µL); thrombocytopenia (<100 000/ µL) for 
more than 30 days 
Bacterial pneumonia, meningitis or sepsis Oropharyngeal candidiasis for > 2 mont hs (children > 6 months of age) 
Cardiomyopathy Cytomegalovirus infection ( onset before 1 month of age) 
Diarrhoea, recurrent or persistent Hepatitis Herpes simplex stomatitis, recurrent (> 2 episodes in 1 year) Herpes simplex bronchitis, pneumonitis, oes ophagitis (onset before 1 month of age) 
Herpes zoster (at least 2 episodes; more than 1 dermatome) Leiomyosarcoma Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia Nephropathy Persistent fever (> 1 month) 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 83 
Category C: severely symptomatic 
Serious bacterial infections, multiple or recu rrent (at least 2 culture confirmed) within a 
2 year period (septicaemia; pneumonia; me ningitis; bone/joint infection; abscess 
(excluding skin, otitis media) 
Candida infection: oesophageal, pulmonary (bronchi, trachea, lungs) 
Cryptococcus infection, extra-pulmonary 
Persistent diarrhoea with Cryptosporidium , Isospora 
Cytomegalovirus disease (onset after 1 month of age) Herpes simplex mucocutaneous infection, bronchitis, pneumonitis for more than 1 
month (onset after 1 month of age) Mycobacterium infection, disseminated 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia 
Kaposi sarcoma Lymphoma of brain Burkitt lymphoma Salmonella septicaemia (non-typhoid); recurrent 
Toxoplasmosis brain abscess (onset after 1 month of age) Encephalopathy (present for more than 2 mont hs; no other concurrent illness): failure to 
attain developmental milestones; impaired brain growth; acquired symmetric motor 
deficit Wasting syndrome: weight loss > 10%; <5
th percentile on weight for height chart on 2 
consecutive measurements Persistent fever (> 30 days) 
84 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 5.1.7 Guidelines for diagnostic imaging 
In patients where chronic sinusitis is not responding adequately to 
treatment, a standard series of radiographs of the sinuses: anteroposterior (AP), 
lateral and AP, Walters—or occipitomental—and lateral) might be justified. Frontal and maxillary sinuses are well demonstrated by a standard AP and a Walters projection, the latter specifically to expose the maxillary sinuses sufficiently well. When densities in one or both of the maxillary sinuses are observed, it is important to know whet her fluid is present. An additional 
Walters projection with the patient’s head tilted some 10–20 degrees to the right 
or left will normally solve that problem easily (water–air line stays horizontal!). 
Inflammatory processes, and especia lly abscesses originating from the 
teeth, are mostly diagnosed clinically , and diagnostic imaging is normally 
not indicated. However, when a clinical diagnosis cannot be made, the presence of an abscess within the bony structures can be fairly well 
demonstrated with conventional radiography. 
With persisting clinical problems, radiological examinations may be 
considered to exclude more serious diseases, such as malignant disease, or inflammatory processes. It is important to obtain images of good diagnostic quality including all necessary projections, and such examinations should not be carried out with mobile X- ray equipment: such equipment will 
normally produce images of inferior qua lity. This is especially true for lateral 
projections of the lumbar spine and the lumbosacral junction. 
When ordering X-ray examinations of the spine, it is crucial to 
communicate the clinical findings to the radiologist or technician in charge of the examinations; the various parts of the spine must be targeted separately. A “whole column” or “thoracolumbar column” in one exposure in order to save film should not be carried out as even in children this will produce an inadequate film. A sufficie ntly good quality image needs to be 
achieved. Otherwise, the radiation exposure to the patient as well as the use of resources is questionable. 
Clinical symptoms, mostly pain, in the extremities and joints should 
be referred for diagnostic imaging as soon as possible when malignancy or an inflammatory process is suspected . High-quality radiography will give 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 85 
sufficient diagnostic information to d ecide on the treatment to be given. 
Inflammatory processes such as osteomyelitis are normally not seen until 
10–14 days after onset. In such cases, a “negative” X-ray does not exclude 
the presence of bone infection, and the examination should be repeated after 
some days if the clinical symptoms persist or become worse. 
The reasons for symptoms such as pain, swelling, or reduced motion 
of joints can often be diagnosed c linically. In the early stages, acute 
inflammatory processes can be diagnos ed on X-ray by the presence of fluid 
in the joint. In the later stages, there will be damage to the bony structures. 
Inflammatory processes may be recogni zed when bony structures are already 
affected or eventually damaged. 
Ultrasound 
One of the most outstanding sonographic diagnoses in tropical 
diseases presenting with fever is amoe bic liver abscess. The abscess appears 
as a hypoechoic round lesion, and is sometimes associated with pleural 
effusion and/or pericardial effusion. The wall of the abscess is usually thin, and the size can vary between small and filling almost the whole lobe of the 
liver. Multiple abscesses may also occur. Since the ab scess contains necrotic 
material and not pus, gas-forming organisms are not present and hyperechoic areas are missing. The appearance of the lesion does not exclude other causes of disease affecting the liver. In 80%–90% of cases, the right lobe of the liver is affected. In about 70% of cases, the abscess is single. 
During treatment sonographic control is compulsory. At the start of 
treatment, the abscess may increase in size; and the reduction in size of a large abscess may take several weeks. Sometimes calcification remains for months or years. 
In developing countries, extrapul monary tuberculosis is common. 
Abdominal tuberculosis with big para -aortic lymph nodes may be detected. 
The kidneys may be infected, and miliar y tuberculosis of the liver and the 
spleen is sometimes visible (often related to HIV infection). These forms of tuberculosis can be combined with ascites. 
The diagnosis of pleural effusion or empyema associated with 
pulmonary tuberculosis can also be made on ultrasound scanning (see 
sections on respective diseases). 
86 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 5.2 Anaemia (pallor) 
Anaemia is a symptomatic diagnosis in individuals who have a 
reduced red blood cell mass. The red cell mass is not routinely determined; 
instead surrogate measurements are made, such as the red blood cell concentration, haematocrit and/or blood haemoglobin concentration. 
Haemoglobin is contained inside re d blood cells. Red blood cells are 
produced in the bone marrow and circulate in the bloodstream. The function of haemoglobin is to carry oxygen from the lungs to the body tissues. In anaemia the amount of red pigment (haemoglobin) in the blood is below the normal level. Haemoglobin levels are the same in healthy persons of 
different ethnic groups, but vary with altitude, sex and age. The normal reference intervals for haemoglobin in blood in subjects living at altitudes below 1300 m are: 
neonates (<24 hrs) 160–250 g/Lchildren aged 6 months to 6 years 110–150 g/L children aged 6–14 years 120–160 g/Ladult males 130–180 g/Ladult females, non-pregnant 120–160 g/Ladult females, pregnant 110–140 g/L 
It is very important to recognize anaemia early. Anaemia is an 
unhealthy condition: patients who are anae mic may not be able to carry out 
their normal daily activities. Children who are anaemic may function poorly 
at school and may not be ab le to play well in sports. Anaemia also affects the 
normal physical and mental development of infants. In pregnancy, anaemia 
may slow the growth of the baby in the uterus leading to a low-birth-weight infant and increased risk of death of the baby. 
Many blood transfusions may be avoi ded if anaemia is detected and 
treated early. If patients with mild or moderate anaemia are treated until the haemoglobin reaches normal levels, then diseases that cause an acute fall in haemoglobin such as malaria will not lead to dangerously low levels that require transfusion. Unfortunately, th e importance of mild anaemia is not 
recognized. Mild anaemia is frequently not detected and often it is ignored. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 87 
It should be remembered that although bl ood transfusions can be life saving, 
they can also be at risk for infection—particularly in countries with a high 
prevalence of bloodborne disease—or dangerous in case of immuno-incompatibility. Subjects who have even mild signs of anaemia should be prevented from blood donation. 
5.2.1 Causes of anaemia 
Anaemia is not a disease itself, but is due to underlying disease or 
disorder in the patient. This is im portant to remember, as the correct 
management includes treating the cause as well as replacing essential substances. Some causes of anaemia are serious illnesses that may endanger 
the life of the patient. The various forms of anaemia can be systematically distinguished according to the underlying pathological causes and the microscopic features of red blood cells. 
Etiological classification of anaemias 
Primary(nonacquired) anaemias 
Non-regenerative anaemias 
Proliferation defects Stem cell proliferation defect Erythropoetic displacement Acute leukaemias Myeloproliferative syndromes Lymphomas Tumour metastases Storage diseases Regenerative anaemias 
Increased haemolysis RBC memb rane defects (hereditary 
spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria), haemoglobinopathies (thalassaemias, Hb-H disease, sickle-cell disease), 
 Enzyme defects (G6PD deficiency) 
88 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Secondary (acquired) anaemias 
Malnutrition Iron, vitamin B12, folate, iodine 
deficiency 
Intoxication Alcohol, drugs, poisons 
Irradiation (aplastic anaemia) Chronic diseases Chronic infection (e.g. hookworm, 
schistosomiasis, Trichuris trichiura, 
Giardia lamblia infection, 
tuberculosis, visceral leishmaniasis, trypanosomiasis, HIV), autoimmune disease, liver disease, inflammation, diabetes 
Organ diseases Liver, kidney, thyroid, small intestine, 
adrenal gland 
Increased haemolysis Immune haemolysis Toxins (e.g. malaria, Wilson disease) Mechanical destruction (e.g. heart 
Haemorrhage, acute or chronic Injury post-partum haemorrhage; 
peptic ulcer, 
 Malignancies In some countries secondary forms of anaemia (e.g. due to malaria) 
may dominate; in other countries they may be primary forms (e.g. in populations with a high prevalence of thalassaemias). Very often there may be combined factors causing anaemia (e .g. malnutrition and infections). The 
patients who are most susceptible to anaemia are pregnant and lactating women, premature infants and all children under 5 years of age. 
There are four main causes of anaemia. 
• Deficiency anaemia : insufficient dietary intake of essential nutrients 
(including iron, folic acid and vita min B12) or increased demand (due 
to increased requirements in pregnancy and lactation, or to compensate for losses, such as iron loss in hookworm infection) to enable the bone marrow to produce enough haemoglobin and red cells. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 89 
• Bone marrow suppression : inability of the bone marrow to produce 
enough haemoglobin and red cells due to severe systemic infections 
(protozoan infection: leishmania ), metabolic diseases, malignancy. 
• Haemolysis : increased destruction of red cells, e.g. due to genetic 
conditions (e.g. sickle-cell anaemi a) or acquired conditions, e.g. 
infection (e.g. malaria); drugs (e.g . methyldopa), autoimmune disease, 
intoxication. 
• Bleeding : a large loss of red cells, e.g. due to injury, peptic ulceration, 
bleeding from the uterus, or a slow chronic loss of red cells, e.g. due 
to hookworm, schistosomiasis, menorrhagia, intestinal tumour. 
Note that a slow loss of red cells over a period of time leads to iron deficiency. 
5.2.2 Investigation of anaemia 
The clinical symptoms of anaemia vary considerably; they may be 
subtle or severe. The following symptoms can be seen in anaemic patients. 
• History headache fatigue, weakness, dizziness buzzing of the ear irritability sore tongue and mouth dyspnoea, especially during exercise tachycardia, especially during exercise palpitations oedema fever bloody diarrhoea, dark stool (melaena) blood in urine epigastric pain heavy menstrual periods (menorrhagia) amenorrhoea loss of libido 
90 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 acute joint pain, swelling 
pregnancy status, multiple pregnancies, breast feeding diet, able to feed/breastfeed. 
• Physical examination rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate, raised temperature, low blood 
general appearance (w asting, marasmus) 
low weight for age (children) hair colour and texture (children) oedema of both feet (children) palpitations pallor of conjunctivae, mucous memb ranes, nailbeds, palms and soles 
smooth tongue signs of cardiac insufficiency: in adults: ankle oedema crackles in lung bases (fluid) enlarged liver raised jugular venous pressure in infants: grunting intercostal or subcostal retractions 
 nasal flaring enlarged liver epigastric tenderness pregnant uterus red, hot joints (sickle-cell anaemia) jaundice, enlarged liver, enlarged spleen shock. 
Note: clinical symptoms and signs of anaemia may not be clearly evident in mild anaemia. 
• Laboratory indicators The laboratory indicators commonly determined to establish the 
diagnosis of anaemia are: 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 91 
• blood haemoglobin 
• haematocrit 
• red blood cell count. 
These indicators measure concentrations rather than amounts; they are 
accepted as suitable with the assumption that the total blood volume in a 
patient remains unchanged. In patients suffering from chronic anaemia the blood volume is almost normal. However, in certain conditions the laboratory indicators may still be with in the normal reference interval 
although the patient is anaemic (e.g. acute blood loss, where the erythrocyte concentration remains unchanged during the first hours). In pseudo-anaemia 
the indicators may be below the reference interval, although the individual may even have an elevated red cell mass: in pregnancy the red blood cell mass is increased; however the plasma volume is increased to a higher extent. Therefore a pregnant woman is pseudo-anaemic when the blood 
haemoglobin concentration is 120 g/L > Hb > 110 g/L; true anaemia exists in 
pregnant women with less than 110 g Hb/L. 
Although the above three laboratory indicators are measured in order 
to diagnose anaemia, additional laboratory indicators must be investigated to determine the exact cause of anaemia. They include the erythrocyte indices 
(RDW, MCV , MCH, MCHC), microscopic examination of the size and shape of red blood cells and additional blood constituents (e.g. reticulocyte 
count, serum iron, serum transferrin, ferritin) as well as specific investigations to exclude infectious mi croorganisms (e.g. parasites in blood, 
stool or urine, leishmania , Mycobacterium tuberculosis ) or other disease 
causing anaemia (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus, malignant diseases) 
5.2.3 Microscopic features of anaemia When a patient becomes anaemic, the red blood cells may change 
their size, shape and appearance, depe nding on the cause of the anaemia. 
Therefore, examination of the appearance of the red blood cells (red blood cell morphology) is a useful way of identifying the cause of anaemia. In an anaemic patient, the red blood cells may appear: • microcytic : small, e.g. in iron deficiency, thalassaemia 
• macrocytic : large, e.g. in folic acid deficiency, liver disease 
• normocytic : normal, e.g. in malaria, or after haemorrhage. 
92 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 These features are useful for the differential diagnosis of anaemia 
(Table 5.5) 
There are features of red blood cells under the microscope that are 
specific for certain diseases, for example: 
• spherocytes in hereditary spherocytosis 
• sickle cells in sickle-cell anaemia 
• basophilic stippling in heavy metal (lead) poisoning. 
5.2.4 Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
Haemoglobin estimation 
Pallor is not a sensitive sign for the pr esence of anaemia. Patients with 
mild anaemia may not appear pale. When pallor is seen, the patient already has moderate or severe anaemia. Therefore the haemoglobin level must be checked in all patients who have a high risk of developing anaemia (children 
under 5, pregnant and lactating women). 
The presence of symptoms and signs of anaemia may not correlate 
well with the haemoglobin level. Patient s who develop anaemia rapidly, e.g. 
after haemorrhage, may have clinical symptoms and signs of anaemia when the haemoglobin level is just below normal. Patients who develop anaemia 
slowly, e.g. due to hookworm infestation, may not show clinical symptoms and signs of anaemia until the haemoglobin level is very low. 
If the haemoglobin level does not match with the patient’s clinical 
picture, consult the laboratory. Errors that can occur in the laboratory include 
poor mixing of blood, and excessive squeezing of the finger after a fingerprick. Therefore the result of haemoglobin measurement may be incorrect and may need to be repeated. 
Physician should be familiar w ith the method of haemoglobin 
estimation used in the laboratory. Some methods are inaccurate because they 
use the principle of visual colour comparison (Tallqvist, Lovibond, Sahli). These methods cannot be used effectively to measure haemoglobin level or monitor a patient’s response to treatmen t; therefore they should not be used 
in a hospital, even at bed side. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 93 
Table 5.5 Thin blood film microscopy 
Microcytic red cells 
Iron deficiency Vitamin A 
deficiency Chronic 
conditions 
(sometimes) Lead poisoning 
Main causes 
Dietary deficiency 
Pregnancy Lactation Bleeding conditions causing chronic blood loss, e.g. gastric ulcer, menorrhagia, malignancies Infections causing chronic blood loss: hookworm, Trichuris trichiura , 
Schistosoma mansoni , S. 
haematobium , 
histolytica/dispar Main cause 
Dietary deficiency 
Chronic infection 
Autoimmune disease Liver disease Renal insufficiency 
Basophilic 
Stool for ova and larvae 
Stool for trophozoites and cysts 
Macrocytic red cells 
Megaloblastic changes No megaloblastic changes 
Oval macrocytes Large round red cells 
Hypersegmented polymorphs Megaloblasts Hypersegmented polymorph neutrophils Reduced platelet count 
94 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.5 Thin blood film microscopy (concluded) 
Main causes 
Folic acid deficiency 
Dietary deficiency Pregnancy Lactation Chronic haemolysis, e.g. sickle-cell disease Vitamin B12 deficiency Diphyllobothrium latum infection 
Haematinics Main causes 
Liver disease Reticulocytosis due to: bleeding, haemolysis, response to 
haematinics, dietary deficiency 
Stool for D. latum ova Test 
Appropriate investigations 
Thin blood film may also show Howell–Jolly bodies Findings 
Thin blood film may also show target cells, in liver disease 
Note: reticulocytes are large, young red cells that stain slightly bluish. 
Normocytic red cells 
Blood loss, acute 
(haemorrhage) Blood destruction (haemolysis) Bone marrow suppression 
Main causes 
Haemorrhage from gastrointestinal tract, uterus Trauma, including burns 
and surgery Main causes 
Sickle-cell anaemia G6PD deficiency Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia Main causes 
Cancer Chronic infections, e.g.: tuberculosis, amoebic abscess, trypanosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis Chronic conditions, e.g.: malnutrition, renal disease, liver disease, aplastic anaemia, 
Appropriate investigations Test 
Blood film for malaria Sickle-cell screen Test 
Appropriate investigations 
Thin blood film may also 
show spherocytes, in 
burns Findings 
Thin blood film may also 
show sickle cells, in sickle-
cell disease 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 95 
The haematocrit is a screening test for haemoglobin that requires a 
supply of capillary tubes. Accurate methods for haemoglobin estimation and 
monitoring recovery after treatment are: haemoglobinometer, colorimeter, 
electronic blood cell counters. 
Examination of the appearance of red cells is an excellent guide to the 
cause of anaemia. However, the correct recognition of red cell abnormalities 
requires considerable technical skill and experience, and this therefore may not be possible in every laboratory. In secondary anaemias, microcytic red blood cells are always a sign of a late stage of the existing anaemia. 
Reticulocytes are young red cells that appear large and stain bluish on 
a peripheral blood film. They can be pr operly counted in a specially stained 
reticulocyte preparation. The presence of reticulocytes usually indicates normally functioning bone marrow. Reticulocytes are seen in three major instances: after bleeding, haemolysis, and during haematinic therapy for deficiency anaemia. 
Sickle-cell screening 
Haemoglobin S (HbS), an abnorma l kind of haemoglobin, can be 
inherited from one (sickle-cell trait) or both (sickle-cell disease) parents. 
Patients with sickle-cell disease have the severe form of the disease, which is 
evident from childhood. Patients with si ckle-cell trait have a normal blood 
picture, but may develop problems under certain conditions, e.g. anaesthesia. Patients from areas where sickle-cell disease is common should have a sickle-cell screen performed if they are planning to undergo general 
anaesthesia. 
The sickle-cell screening test cannot distinguish patients with sickle-
cell disease from those with sickle-cell trait. All patients who have a positive sickle-cell screening test should have a confirmatory test (haemoglobin electrophoresis) performed in a referral centre in order to fully characterize the type of haemoglobin abnormality. This assists in the management of the disease and also provides guidance if the pa tient is planning to have children. 
Patients with sickle-cell disease are susceptible to infection with 
Pneumococcus , Meningococcus , Haemophilus and Salmonella species. Adult 
patients are also susceptible to severe P. falciparum malaria infections. 
96 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Thalassaemia screening 
Thalassaemias are a group of haemolytic anaemias that are prevalent 
in Mediterranean and south-east Asian populations. Different forms of 
thalassaemia are distinguished by biochemical analysis ( α-thalassaemia, δ-β-
thalassaemia, β-thalassaemia). The inherited diseases are caused by an 
altered synthesis of haemoglobin, which results in insufficient formation of 
red blood cells. As in sickle-cell anaem ia, the biochemical defect can be 
inherited from one parent (thalassaemia trait) or from both parents (thalassaemia disease). In populations with thalassaemia and sickle-cell disease, some patients may suffer from both disorders (HbS– β-thalassaemia 
Clinical signs 
Subjects with thalassaemia trait (thalassaemia minor) usually do not 
show signs of anaemia. Thalassaemia patients with α-thalassaemia or δ-β-
thalassaemia show signs of severe anaemia (thalassaemia major) accompanied by jaundice, gallstones, splenomegaly and ulcers on the lower 
legs. Often the faces of these patients have a mongoloid appearance which results from hyperactivity of the bone marrow, causing hyperplasia of the facial bones. Signs of anaemia ar e less pronounced in patients with β-
thalassaemia. 
Laboratory indicators 
• RBC below normal 
• erythrocytes with diffuse basophilic stippling 
• poikilocytosis 
• anisocytosis 
• MCV reduced 
• target cells 
• reticulocyte number increased. 
The differential diagnosis of thal assaemia is made by electrophoresis 
of the α-, β- and δ- chains of haemoglobin. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 97 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency screening 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase de ficiency (G6PD) is a group of 
X-chromosomal inherited diseases that is fully expressed only in males. ´The 
disease is transmitted only from the mother and never from father to son. Female carriers of the gene defect have two red cell populations, one of 
which behaves normal whereas the other population exhibits reduced G-6PD activity. Therefore some heterozygotic females appear to be normal, whereas other female carriers are fully affected. The disease is prevalent in Mediterranean and sub-Saha ran populations, although the genetic patterns of 
G6PD deficiency in these groups are different. 
In G6PD deficiency the lifespan of red blood cells is shortened, and 
the cells are haemolysed when exposed to certain drugs (e.g. primaquine during treatment of P. vivax malaria; phenylhydrazine-like drugs), 
vegetables (fava bean), diabetic aci dosis, or during the neonatal period of 
life. Consequently patients with G6PD deficiency may develop anaemia that 
may occasionally be accompanied by h yperbilirubinaemia and the formation 
of methaemoglobin. In severe haemolytic episodes the patient may suffer from back pain and his urine may turn dark. 
Laboratory indicators 
• haemoglobin reduced 
• elevated reticulocyte count 
• Heinz bodies 
• serum bilirubin elevated 
• methaemoglobin 
• haemoglobinuria. 
Stool examination 
Hookworm, S. mansoni , E. histolytica and T. trichiura infestation of 
bowel cause a slow loss of red blood cells leading to iron deficiency 
anaemia. Hookworm infestation also causes loss of proteins, and heavy infestation can lead to malnutrition. Heavy G. lamblia infestation may cause 
malabsorption and lack of essential nutrients. D. latum (the fish tapeworm) is 
an unusual helminth that consumes vita min B12 in the bowel, leading to B12 
98 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 deficiency and megaloblastic anaemia. It is found in persons who eat raw or 
undercooked fresh-water fish. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging 
In thalassaemia, the skeleton shows signs of bone marrow 
hyperactivity (bone marrow hyperplasia). 
Ultrasound 
Sickle-cell disease involves various organs, and sonogr aphic findings 
are important (ultrasound for hepato splenomegaly, gallstones and renal 
inflammation/infection in sickle-cell disease). The kidneys and urinary 
system are often affected. Chroni c inflammatory processes lead to 
parenchymal scarring, normally depicted as a focal indentation of the renal parenchyma associated with a dilated pelvicaliceal system. Septic kidneys can also occur, and pus may be visi ble within the collecting system as 
echogenic material that shifts with pos itional change. The liver is enlarged; 
the spleen is extremely enlarged and can even reach the pelvis. 
5.3 Diarrhoea 
Diarrhoea is a change in normal st ool pattern characterized by passing 
three or more unformed stools in a 24 hour period, or a single stool with blood and/or mucous. Diarrhoea stool mixed with blood is called dysentery. Diarrhoea is due to a disease or infection in the bowel (jejunum and/or caecum) (enteral causes of diarrhoea) or secondary to a disease or infection 
elsewhere in the body (parenteral causes of diarrhoea). 
Enteral causes of diarrhoea include: 
• bacterial infections or toxins, e.g. infection with Campylobacter 
jejuni , Vibrio cholerae , Escherichia coli , Staphylococcus aureus , 
Clostridium perfringens , shigella (bacillary dysentery), salmonella 
• viral infections, e.g. infection with rotavirus, Norwalk virus 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 99 
• protozoan infections, e.g. infection with Entamoeba histolytica /dispar , 
Balantidium coli , Giardia lamblia , Cryptosporidium parvum , Isospora 
• poisoning, e.g. kerosene, liquid paraffin 
• malabsorption, probably due to repeat ed protozoan, bacterial and viral 
infections or allergic reactions (coeliac disease) 
• lactase deficiency, often following bowel infections or kwashiorkor. 
• malignancy of the bowel, e.g. carcinoma of the colon. 
• helminthic infections (e.g. infection with Trichuris trichiura , 
Strongyloides stercoralis ) and trematode infections (e.g. infection with 
Schistosoma mansoni ) rarely cause diarrhoea in infants. 
Some of the enteral causes of dia rrhoea are associated with fever. 
Bloody diarrhoea (dysentery) is always due to enteral causes. 
Parenteral causes of diarrhoea include: 
• otitis media 
• pneumonia 
• urinary tract infection 
• HIV infection 
• disorders of the pancreas 
• treatment with antibiotics. 
Diarrhoea due to parenteral causes is more common in children and is 
usually associated with fever. 
5.3.1 Types of diarrhoea 
Diarrhoea can also be classified according to the presence or absence 
of blood in the stool (dysentery) and fever, respectively. These are the most 
important factors to note when making a diagnosis of the cause of diarrhoea. 
Diarrhoea can be classified as: • acute : starts suddenly and lasts from a few hours up to one or two 
weeks. Bacterial infections usually cause diarrhoea within 24 hours, 
whereas viruses may cause diarrhoea more than two days after exposure, which may be combined with vomiting (see Tables 5.6a and 
100 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • persistent (relapsing or chronic): diarrhoea lasting two or more weeks. 
The causes may be bacterial or protoz oan infection, allergic reactions 
(e.g. gluten) or enzyme defects (e.g. lactase deficiency). 
5.3.2 Investigation of diarrhoea 
When taking a history and examining a patient with diarrhoea, two 
factors should be kept in mind: the le vel of hydration and the cause of the 
diarrhoea. 
The assessment of a patient with di arrhoea is summarized as follows 
(see Tables 5.6 and 5.7). 
Table 5.6a Acute diarrhoea with blood (less than two weeks’ duration) 
Fever No fever 
Main causes 
Shigella (bacillary) dysentery 
Schistosoma mansoni 
Rotavirus (in children) 
*Salmonella enterocolitis Campylobacter enterocolitis 
E. coli (enteropathogenic) Main causes 
Entamoeba histolytica* (amoebiasis) 
Trichuris trichiura 
Giardia lamblia 
Balantidium coli 
Fresh stool Test 
Fresh stool 
Pus cells, red blood cells Findings Red blood cells 
E. histolytica/dispar trophozoites 
Giardia lamblia 
B. coli trophozoites 
S. mansoni ova 
T. trichiura ova 
*occasionally with fever. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 101 
Table 5.6b Acute diarrhoea without blood (less than two weeks’ 
Fever Elevated temperature or no fever 
Main causes 
Salmonella 
Shigella (bacillary) 
Campylobacter 
Malaria, especially P falciparum Almost any infection in a child: UTI, pneumonia, otitis media, tonsillitis, viral 
infection Main causes 
Viral gastroenteritis, 
e.g. rotavirus 
C. perfringens* 
E. coli (toxigenic)* 
S. aureus* 
E. histolytica/dispar 
(severe watery 
diarrhoea) 
Strongyloides 
stercoralis 
(fatty diarrhoea) 
Examine patient for 
local infection 
Blood film for malaria 
Fresh stool Test 
Fresh stool Test Fresh stool for dark 
field examination Test 
Fresh stool 
Findings Pus cells Findings Negative in viral 
infections and food 
poisoning E. histolytica /dispar 
trophozoites 
B. coli trophozoites Findings 
Motile vibrios of 
Vibrio cholerae Findings S. stercoralis 
*food poisoning. 
** Baermann test. 
• History duration of diarrhoea (how many days) frequency of diarrhoea (how many times a day) amount of diarrhoeal stool (quantity of stool) consistency/colour of stool, e.g. watery, blood-stained, mucoid, fatty 
102 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.7 Persistent (chronic) diarrhoea (more than two weeks’ 
Fever and wasting Blood, no fever Fatty diarrhoea 
Causes include 
Tuberculous enteritis 
Visceral leishmaniasis 
Cryptosporidium , 
Isospora infection 
HIV infection Causes include 
Schistosoma mansoni 
Trichuris trichiuria 
E. histolytica/dispar 
(amoebiasis) 
Colitis ulcerosa 
Crohn disease Causes include 
Giardia lamblia (giardiasis) 
Strongyloides stercoralis 
Tropical sprue 
Chronic pancreatitis 
Modified stool 
Ziehl–Neelsen Test 
Fresh stool Test Stool concentration 
Cryptosporidium oocysts Findings E. histolytica/dispar 
trophozoites 
S. mansoni ova 
T. trichiura ova Findings 
G. lamblia cysts 
Test Other specific 
concentration technique Test 
Other specific 
concentration technique 
Isospora belli oocysts 
 Other possibilities Giardia lamblia 
trophozoites 
Strongyloides stercoralis 
Treat appropriately Treat appropriately Treat appropriately 
 vomiting excessive thirst ability to drink/breastfeed urine output lethargy, restlessness fever 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 103 
abdominal pain 
diet other people affected, e.g. household symptoms of other infections (see Section 5.1 on fever). 
• Physical examination general condition, e.g. lethargic, irritable, confused, unconscious 
rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate, raised temperature sunken eyes dry mucous membranes (mouth and tongue) poor skin turgor no tear production sunken fontanelle severe undernutrition pallor hair changes hepatosplenomegaly abdominal tenderness. signs of other infections (see Section 5.1 on fever). 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations • Stool examination is not helpful in mild acute watery diarrhoea of up to two days’ duration, except in severe diarrhoea in the case of suspected cholera. Stool examination is useful in acute dysentery and 
in persistent diarrhoea (mor e than two weeks’ duration). 
• Stool: macroscopic appearance, red cells, pus cells, bacteria of characteristic shape and motility, trophozoites, cysts, larvae, ova; concentration method. 
• Blood slide for malaria. 
• Haemoglobin. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations • X-ray for bowel malignancy. 
104 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Ultrasound for schistosomiasis, co litis ulcerosa, bacterial colitis, 
abdominal tuberculosis, dive rticulitis and malignancies. 
• Tests for other infections (see Section 5.1 on fever). 
Other causes of fresh blood in stool which may occur without 
diarrhoea include: • carcinoma 
• E. coli infection 
• haemorrhoids 
• anal fissure 
• S. mansoni infection 
• causes of occult blood in stool include: 
• meat in the diet 
• drugs (aspirin) 
• parasite infections 
• malignancies. 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
Occult blood test (only applicable after food intake without meat) 
Melaena is black stool smelling typically of blood. Melaena indicates 
significant bleeding from the stomach and/or upper intestinal tract. During 
the passage through the bowel the blood is altered, which explains the 
change in colour from red to black. After an intake of iron tablets, the stool also appears black which could be mi staken for melaena, except melaena 
stool is soft and tarry, and the stool in iron therapy is usually hard. 
Direct stool examination 
One of the most important examinations is the macroscopic 
appearance of stool. For example, a patient may report passing loose, bloody 
stools (dysentery), yet the stool appears normal. This is vital information for 
the clinician, who then needs to explore further the history given by the patient. The laboratory should always report on the macroscopic appearance 
of stool. Identification of enteric causes of acute mild to moderate watery diarrhoea is difficult and is not clini cally important, as long as dehydration is 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 105 
corrected. Causes include viral infections and mild bacterial infections, 
which do not require specific treatment. Acute watery diarrhoea may also be due to parenteral causes, such as malari a, which must be investigated. Stool 
examination is performed if the diarrhoea persists. 
In severe watery diarrhoea, dark field microscopy examination of 
stool may give an immediate presumptive diagnosis of cholera, by recognizing the characteristic shape and motility of Vibrio cholerae 
organisms. 
Immunocompromised patients, such as patients with AIDS, may 
develop severe and persistent diarrho ea due to the following intestinal 
organisms: Entamoeba histolytica , Cryptosporidium parvum , Isospora belli , 
Cyclospora cayetanensis , Microsporidia . Cryptosporidium is detected using 
modified Ziehl Neelsen stain of stool; Isospora is recognised by direct stool 
examination. Cyclospora and Microsporidium require specialized laboratory 
procedures for detection (fluorescent staining; special stains). Unfortunately treatment is rarely effective. In immunocompetent individuals, these infections cause self-limiting diarrhoea for which specific treatment is not required. Persistent diarrhoea in AIDS patients may also be due to the direct effect of HIV on the bowel wall cells. 
In patients with bloody diarrhoea (dysentery), stool examination is 
helpful. Direct examination of stool in dysentery is a very rapid procedure, and a laboratory can be requested to perform this test as an emergency. Microscopic examination of stool distinguishes bacterial from parasitic causes of dysentery, which is vital for selecting appropriate management. In bacterial dysentery, stool contains re d cells and pus cells, although the type 
of bacteria cannot be determined (t his requires stool culture). Bacterial 
identification may be important for epidemiological purposes, e.g. during 
epidemics (see Chapter 6). In parasitic infection, trophozoites ( E 
histolytica/dispar ) and ova ( S mansoni, T trichiura ) are seen and require 
specific treatment. 
Note: hookworm and malaria never cause bloody diarrhoea. 
106 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Enterobius vermicularis causes anal itching and is common in 
children. The correct specimen for investigation of Enterobius vermicularis 
infection is an anal swab, not stool examination. 
If a patient reports seeing worms in the stool, a stool examination 
should be performed. 
Larvae seen on examination of fresh stool are likely to be 
Strongyloides stercoralis . Active larvae seen in stale stool are likely to be 
hookworm, especially if hookworm ova are also seen. Other pathogens may 
also be present, e.g. S. mansoni ova. 
In healthy individuals, Cryptosporidium , Blastocystis hominis and 
Isospora belli cause acute self-limiting watery diarrhoea (especially in 
children) for which specific treatment is usually not require d. These protozoa 
may cause severe and persistent diarrhoea in patients with reduced immunity, e.g. HIV sufferers. 
Trichomonas hominis infection is usually non-pathogenic. However, 
heavy infections may cause diarrhoea and require treatment. 
Direct examination of stool for parasites is not a very sensitive test, as 
only a small part of the stool is exam ined. If in doubt, the stool examination 
may need to be examined by a con centration technique several times if 
necessary. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
In most cases, conventional, pl ain abdominal radiographs will add 
little information to what can be found clinically and from laboratory tests. 
Pathological calcifications indicating some sort of parasitic disease may be 
detected. Also, severe inflammatory bowel disease with dilatation of bowel loops can be observed. Furthermore, high-quality radiographs may reveal the 
presence of pathologic soft tissue masses (tumours) and displaced organs, but even in the hands of a well traine d radiologist, the amount of information 
to be extracted from such images is limited. 
Barium studies such as a small bowel “pass through”, or barium 
enema using either single or double contrast technique for the large bowel are good diagnostic tools when performed correctly. However, both 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 107 
equipment (fluoroscopy with image in tensifier) and well trained operators 
are required. Otherwise, such examinations are not recommended. 
Ultrasound 
Intestinal schistosomiasis (see Section 5.6 on jaundice). 
5.4 Cough and shortness of breath 
Cough is an explosive expiration to clear the airway of secretions and 
foreign bodies. Shortness of breath (dyspnoea) is an abnormally 
uncomfortable awareness of breat hing. Coughing may be initiated 
voluntarily or as a reflex action. Coughi ng is an essential m echanism to keep 
the airway clear for the vital process of breathing. Shortness of breath is a change in the normal breathing pattern appropriate to the metabolic demands 
of the body. 
Cough and shortness of breath share many of the same causes. Cough 
is due to irritation of the “cough receptors” in the respiratory mucous membranes, which can occur when there is infection or oedema (excess fluid) in the membranes. The majo r mechanism that induces shortness of 
breath is a reduction in the amount of oxygen carried in the bloodstream. The common causes of cough and shortness of breath are therefore due to: • diseases of the respiratory system (airway or lungs) 
• diseases of the heart. Diseases of the respiratory system causing cough and/or shortness of 
breath are given below. The organisms listed are some of the common agents causing infections of the respiratory system. • Viral infections: tonsillitis, laryng itis, pharyngitis, tracheitis, laryngo-
tracheo-bronchitis (LTB or croup), bronchitis, bronchiolitis, pneumonia (respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, influenza virus, mumps virus, varicella-zoster virus, vaccinia, coxsackievirus). 
• Bacterial infections: tonsillitis, bronchitis, emphysema, pneumonia, 
lung abscess, pneumonic plague (Group A β-haemolytic streptococci, 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Haemophilus influenzae, Staphy lococcus aureus, Mycoplasma 
108 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Yersinia pestis, Bordetella 
pertussis ). 
• Chlamydial infections: pneumonia ( Chlamydia pneumoniae ). 
• Fungal infections: pharyngitis, pneumonia ( Candida spp., Aspergillus 
• Parasitic infections: pneumonia, pneumonitis ( Paragonimus 
westermani, Pneumocystis carinii , larvae of Ascaris lumbricoides , 
Strongyloides stercoralis , hookworm). 
• Pneumothorax: spontaneous, emphysema bullae, lung abscess, malignancy, chest trauma. 
• Pleural effusion: pneumonia, malignancy. 
• Empyema: pneumonia, or spread from a nearby structure, e.g. subdiaphragmatic abscess. 
• Pleural abscess: amoeba, tuberculosis. 
• Pneumoconiosis: silicosis, coal dust, asbestosis. 
• Malignancy: carcinoma of the bronchus. 
Diseases of the heart or cardiov ascular system causing cough and 
shortness of breath include the following. 
• Heart failure due to rheumatic h eart disease, ischaemic heart disease, 
left heart insufficiency, congenital abnormalities of the heart, hypertension, etc. Heart failure leads to accumulation of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary oedema). 
• Myocarditis, e.g. caused by viral, bacterial or trypanosome infection 
• Pericarditis, e.g. due to viral infection, bacterial infection (staphylococci, pneumococci, streptococci, meningococci, Haemophilus influenzae , Mycobacterium tuberculosis ). 
• M. tuberculosis is a cause of constrictive pericarditis. 
• Pulmonary embolism. 
Shortness of breath can occur in patients with: 
• severe anaemia 
• diabetic ketoacidosis and other severe metabolic disorders of the body 
• septicaemia 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 109 
• severe malaria 
• severe kyphoscoliosis. 
5.4.1 Types of cough and shortness of breath 
Cough can be classified as: 
• Acute : less than 3 weeks duration. Viral infections of the respiratory 
system are usually acute; also acute bacterial bronchitis or pneumonia, some forms of heart failure, and pulmonary embolus. 
• Chronic : more than three weeks’ duration. Causes of chronic cough 
include tuberculous pneumonia, passage of larvae of helminths through the lungs, trematodes, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, malignancy, asthma. 
Cough can also be classified as: 
Productive: where there is production of sputum. The nature of the 
sputum can give important clues to the cause of the cough (see Table 5.8). 
Non-productive: where there is no sputum. The cough is a dry cough. 
Shortness of breath can be: 
• of sudden onset (acute): foreign body inhalation (in young children!), 
oedema of the glottis, pneumothorax 
• on exertion : cardiac failure, anaemia, constrictive pericarditis 
• at rest : pneumothorax, pulmonary embolus, heart failure, pleural 
• on lying flat (orthopnoea): heart failure, chronic bronchitis 
• in acute episodes : asthma, bronchiectasis 
• in acute episodes at night (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea): heart 
• chronic : severe chronic bronchitis or emphysema, asthma, 
pneumoconiosis, severe kyphoscoliosis. 
110 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.8 The nature of sputum 
White Green Grey-yellowish Large amounts of 
Viral infection Bacterial infection Tuberculosis Lung abscess 
Bronchiectasis 
Blood-tinged Frothy/pink tinged Frank blood 
Pneumonic plague 
P. westermani infection Pulmonary oedema Bronchitis 
Tuberculosis 
Malignancy Rheumatic heart disease P. westermani infection 
Pulmonary embolus 
5.4.2 Investigation of cough and shortness of breath 
• History duration aggravating, relieving factors sore throat sputum (colour consistency, amount) wheezing chest pain (localized) ankle swelling phlebitis of the legs fever weight loss night sweats occupation contacts smoking. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 111 
• Physical examination 
rapid/irregular pulse, rapid respiratory rate, raised temperature, 
raised/lowered blood 
pressure wheeze, stridor pallor cyanosis inflammation/swelling of the pharynx use of accessory muscles of respiration, chest indrawing trachea deviated asymmetric chest wall movement displaced apex beat heart murmurs (systolic, diastolic) signs of cardiac failure. bronchial breathing rhonchi, crackles pleural rub phlebitis in the legs. 
• Physical examination, adults oedema crackles in lung bases (fluid) enlarged liver raised jugular venous pressure. 
• Physical examination, infants grunting intercostal and s ubcostal indrawing 
nasal flaring enlarged liver hyperresonance/dullness to percussion. 
• Laboratory investigations sputum for acid-fast bacilli sputum for larvae sputum or stool for ova of Paragonimus westermani . 
112 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
• Chest X-ray for pneumonia, pleural effusion, enlarged heart, pulmonary congestion, airway obstruction or pneumothorax. 
• Ultrasound of the chest for pleural effusion, pleural lesions. 
Children with pneumonia 
For children at rest, danger levels for fast breathing are: 
Aged <2 months: 60 or more breaths per minuteAged 2 months to 12 months: 50 or more breaths per minuteAged 12 months to 5 years: 40 or more breaths per minute
 In children with pneumonia, crepitations and bronchial breathing may 
be hard to hear. Therefore in childre n aged two months to five years, 
pneumonia is diagnosed as follows: 
Fast breathing only: pneumonia Fast breathing and chest indrawing: severe pneumonia Fast breathing, chest indrawing and cyanosis: very severe pneumonia 
 In children younger than two months of age, pneumonia must be 
considered if there is one or more of any of the following: fast breathing, severe chest in-drawing, convulsions, stopped feeding well, abnormally sleepy, stridor, wheezing, fever >38 °C, low temperature < 35.5 °C, central cyanosis, grunting.
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
Sputum for acid-fast bacilli 
The first sputum sample is collected when the patient is first seen at 
the health facility. The patient is then given a container to collect sputum 
early the next morning, before eating (early morning sputum sample), and the third sample is collected when the patient attends the health facility the 
next day. Three samples are therefore collected within two visits to the health facility. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 113 
Although three samples of sputum are usually examined for 
pulmonary tuberculosis, this is not a fixed requirement. If the first sputum 
sample is positive, a second sample is us ually checked to ensure there are no 
clerical or administrative errors. A third sample is not required. If all three 
samples are negative (and the diagnosi s is strongly suspected), several 
further samples may be requested, e.g. six or more. 
Negative smears do not rule out pulm onary tuberculosis. Patients with 
pulmonary tuberculosis and immune defi ciency, e.g. HIV infection, are more 
likely to produce negative smears. 
P. westermani infection of the lungs may mimic pulmonary 
tuberculosis. 
Guidelines for imaging investigations X-ray 
It is advisable to start with a simple posterior-anterior-radiograph with 
the patient in the upright position. If the patient is unable to stand, an 
anterior-posterior-radiograph of the ches t with the patient on a stretcher or on 
the examination table will do. Major pathological processes such as pulmonary consolidation due to pne umonia (including tuberculosis), 
clinically significant atelectasis, tu mours, heart failure with pulmonary 
congestion, lung abscesses, parasitic and fungal infections, and pleural fluid 
are demonstrated sufficiently well fo r initial diagnostic purposes. However, 
the image quality needs to be good. It is important that the examinations are performed in an X-ray department usi ng stationary equipment and not with 
mobile equipment. Most patients can be transported (or can walk) to the X-
ray department for examination. The use of mobile units should be restricted to those patients who cannot be moved. 
Foreign bodies swallowed and stuck in the throat can usually be 
located by conventional radiography using one lateral projection of the 
region. However, a “normal” image does not exclude the presence of a foreign body since many such “articles” , including most fish bones, are not 
sufficiently radiopaque to be detected. When technically possible, additional lateral and AP projections taken during the swallowing of diluted contrast 
media (barium suspension or water-soluble contrast medium) may be of 
114 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 help. However, such procedures normally require fluoroscopy and the 
presence of a radiologist. 
Symptoms of upper airway obstruction and dysphagia may rarely 
indicate the presence of a retropharyngeal process, usually an abscess. Conventional X-ray examination such as a lateral radiograph of the neck 
structures may strengthen the suspicio n or confirm the diagnosis; however 
more sophisticated and reliable dia gnostic information cannot be obtained 
from conventional radiography alone. Co mputer tomography would be the 
method of choice if available. A very well trained ultrasound operator might 
be able to supply some diagnostic info rmation, but that will highly depend 
on his or her skills. 
Pain in the chest may have a multitude of causes. A proper clinical 
evaluation of the patient normally gives sufficient information to make a diagnosis and to decide on appropriate treatment. Diagnostic imaging should 
only be considered to confirm a clinical diagnosis. The diagnosis of Echinococcus infection of the lung is made by chest X-ray. 
In the presence of symptoms indicating heart failure and pulmonary 
congestion, a proper clinical evaluation followed by appropriate treatment should be given the highest priority. A chest radiograph may be indicated when complications such as pneumonia are suspected, or when the patient’s condition does not improve in spite of adequate treatment. It might be of 
some value to take a chest radiograph to evaluate the course of treatment, or before discharging the patient from hospital after treating the complications. 
When diagnostic imaging for the diagnosis of pulmonary disease is 
needed, plain PA and lateral chest radiogr aphs with the patient in the upright 
position will give sufficient diagnostic information to decide upon treatment. 
When the patient is unable to stand upright, a normal AP radiograph of the chest with the patient lying on her/his back on the examination table, will be 
enough (mobile X-ray equipment to be a voided whenever possible!). In such 
cases, additional valuable informa tion on the presence and quantity of 
pleural fluid, can be obtained by placing the patient on her/his side, and making an examination with a horizont al X-ray beam (lateral decubitus 
position). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 115 
Ultrasound 
Sonography may be of some value when evaluating pleural fluid and 
pathologic processes that are located cl ose to, or affecting the, chest wall. 
Cardiac and pericardial disease may be visualized by ultrasonography 
(“echocardiography”). Such examinations require specially trained operators 
and often more sophisticated equipmen t than generally available in small 
hospitals and clinics. Congestion of the liver with or without ascites due to 
right heart insufficiency from conge nital or acquired heart disease can be 
demonstrated. 
5.5 Skin diseases 
Diseases of the skin lead to cha nges in the appearance, feel and 
function of the skin. The hair and nails are part of the skin structure and may 
also be affected by the same diseases that affect the skin. Skin disease may 
be due to local or external factors or systemic diseases of the body. Alterations of the skin are among the best indicators of serious disease of the body. Clinicians must be able to di stinguish skin diseases from those features 
on the skin that indicate an underlying disease, including malignant disease (e.g. breast cancer), infectious disease (v iral [e.g. HIV , herpes], bacterial 
[e.g. leprosy] and parasitic [e.g. le ishmania]), malnutrition, metabolic 
disease (e.g. Addison disease), systemic disease (e.g. lupus erythematosus). The most important diagnostic tool for identifying skin diseases is accurate 
observation. 
Skin lesions may be caused by a range of agents. 
• Viral infection: measles (rubeola) , chickenpox (varicella), rubella, 
herpes ( Herpes simplex, Herpes zoster ), warts, molluscum 
contagiosum, dengue, etc. 
• Rickettsial infection: typhus ( Rickettsia spp.). 
• Bacterial infection: impetigo ( Staphylococcus aureus ), erysipelas 
(Group A streptococci), cellulitis, folliculitis, furuncles (boils), 
abscesses (mainly from staphylococci), syphilis ( Treponema 
pallidum ), plague ( Yersinia pestis ), leprosy ( Mycobacterium leprae ), 
anthrax ( Bacillus anthracis ), tuberculosis ( Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis ), Buruli ulcer ( Mycobacterium ulcerans ), etc. 
116 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Fungal infection: candidiasis, tinea, pityriasis versicolor ( Candida 
albicans , Trichophyton spp., Epidermophyton spp., Microsporum 
spp.), Madura foot ( Actinomadura madurae ), etc. 
• Protozoan infection: trypanosoma chancre ( Trypanosoma spp.); 
cutaneous leishmaniasis ( Leishmania infantum, L . tropica ), Calabar 
swelling (microfilariae). 
• Helminthic infection: onchocerciasis ( Onchocerca volvulus ), guinea 
worm ( Dracunculus medinensis ), cutaneous larva migrans 
(Ancylostoma braziliense), larva currens (Strongyloides stercoralis ), 
• Ectoparasite infection: scabies ( Sarcoptes scabiei ), jiggers ( Tunga 
penetrans ), lice ( Pediculus spp.), fleas, etc. 
• Allergic conditions: urticaria, allerg ies to drugs (e.g. Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis ), food, chemicals, intestinal 
helminths, schistosomiasis (Katayama fever). 
• Autoimmune disease: Werlhoff disease 
• Inflammatory conditions: eczema, ps oriasis, acne, pityriasis rosea, 
lichen planus. 
• Blistering (bullous conditions): pemphigus, pemphigoid, erythema 
multiforme, dermatitis, herpetiformis. 
• Connective tissue disorders: systemic lupus erythematosus, discoid lupus, scleroderma. 
• Nutritional deficiencies: vitamin A deficiency, vitamin C deficiency (scurvy), niacin deficiency (pellagra), etc. 
• Genetic conditions: albinism. 
• Metabolic diseases: diabetes mellitus. 
• Organ diseases: hepatic disease, adrenal disease. 
• Blood disorders: sickle-cell disease, thalassaemias. 
• Vascular disorders: varicose ulcers, atherosclerotic vessel disease. 
• Injuries: cut wounds, ulcers, burns, calluses. 
• Malignant disorders: squamous ce ll carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, 
melanoma, Kaposi sarcoma. 
• Others: vitiligo. 
• Haemorrhagic fever: petechiae (d engue, Rift Valley, Congo–Crimean). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 117 
5.5.1 Types of skin lesion 
Skin lesions are classified and d escribed according to the following 
features: • flat lesions : macules, petechiae (small spots of blood in the skin) 
• raised lesions : papules, wheals, vesicles/bullae, pustules, nodules, 
cysts, abscesses, plaques, keloids 
• depressed lesions : ulcers, scars, excoriation, sinuses, atrophy 
• shape : linear, circular, serpiginous 
• arrangement : single, grouped 
• distribution : localized, regional, generalized, following a dermatome 
pattern, areas of pressure 
• exudate : discharge, crusts, bleeding 
• colour : red, pale, etc. 
• sensation : itching, pain, anaesthesia. 
Chronic ulcers on the skin are often due to irritation, as with bedsores, 
and they may become infected and inflamed as they grow. Very often the patient may have an u nderlying disease that reduces the resistance to 
external mechanic or invasive irritant s. Patients may suffer from painful or 
painless chronic ulcers (see Table 5.9). 
5.5.2 Investigation of skin disease 
fever pain itching sensation (numbness, burning, altered sensation) scaling duration site drug history occupation, exposure diet family members affected. 
118 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.9 Examination of chronic ulcers 
Painful Painless 
Tropical ulcer Leprosy 
Guinea worm Anthrax 
Sickle-cell disease Syphilis (gumma) Varicose Buruli ulcer Atherosclerotic Cutaneous leishmaniasis Tuberculosis Diabetes Malignancy Test 
Sickle-cell screen Test 
Skin smear or tissue fluid for acid-fast 
bacilli and other bacteria 
 Skin biopsy or fluid for LD bodies 
 VDRL Urine/blood for glucose 
• Physical examination raised temperature, rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate, high blood 
general condition (emaciated, etc) pallor jaundice oedema hair and nail changes (hair loss, ridges, clubbing) mucous membranes (ulcers, lesions, bleeding) 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 119 
lesion type: shape, arrangement, distribution, colour, edges (raised or 
not raised), surface features (smooth, rough, thickened), 
sensation. 
lymphadenopathy (local, generalized) lesion discharge, bleeding, scaling, scab. 
• Laboratory investigations 
skin scrapings for fungus skin snip for microfilariae (onchocerciasis) skin snip for Leishman–Donovan (LD) bodies subcutaneous fluid for trypanosomes skin slit smear for acid-fast bacilli skin puncture for histological/microbial examination blood slide for microfilaria (loa loa during the day, Wuchereria 
bancrofti at night) 
skin smear or tissue fluid for bacteria/acid-fast bacilli stool for ova and larvae anal swab for Enterobius vermicularis 
sickle-cell screen serum for syphilis screening urine and blood for glucose. 
• Diagnostic imaging investigations ultrasound for skin abscesses, Kaposi sarcoma and filariasis. 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
 Many skin diseases are identified by inspection. Scabies is recognized 
by burrows (fine wavy dark lines a fe w millimetres long with a papule at one 
end); pediculosis (lice) by the presence of greyish-white nits (ova) on the hair shafts, which cannot be dislodged; active lice may also be seen. Strongyloides stercoralis (larva currens) causes an itchy wheal which comes 
and goes in a few hours; the dog hookworm ( Ancylostoma braziliense ) 
causes a slow moving wheal. 
120 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Many simple microscopic laboratory tests are available for the 
investigation of skin diseases. These s hould be used wherever possible to 
identify the cause. 
In developing countries most causes of skin disease are infectious in 
origin. Some skin diseases are caused by sexually transmitted infections. 
These include venereal warts (condylomata lata caused by syphilis; 
condylomata acuminata caused by the human papilloma virus), the rash of secondary syphilis (non-itchy macular rash on the palms and soles), molluscum contagiosum (umbilicated papules caused by pox virus), pubic (crab) lice (caused by the louse Phthirus pubis ) and scabies (caused by the 
mite Sarcoptes scabiei ). 
Differentiate chronic fungal infecti on from inflammatory or allergic 
conditions by examination of skin scrap ings for fungal elements using the 
potassium hydroxide (KOH) technique. Do not treat fungal infection with steroid creams, which encourage the fungus to spread. 
Many skin diseases (especially in children) are due to inadequate 
hygiene, and improve with daily washi ng of the body with soap and water, 
e.g. fungal skin infections, scabies. 
Most skin conditions require sever al weeks of treatment to heal 
completely. 
Skin diseases associated with acquire d immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) include generalised pruritic dermatitis, impetigo, eczema, scabies 
with secondary bacterial infection, recurrent Herpes zoster vesicular rash 
and Kaposi sarcoma of the skin and oral cavity. Recurrent severe “oral thrush” due to infection with Candida spp, and extensive mouth ulcers due 
to H simplex infection are significantly associated with AIDS. Kaposi 
sarcoma appears as red/purplish skin tumours that may also affect the gastrointestinal tract and lung. 
Remember, secondary syphilis is a cau se of skin disease, particularly a 
non-itchy macular rash on the palms and soles. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 121 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
Ultrasound 
Skin abscesses 
Sonography can be useful if the appropriate probe is available 
(75 MHz). The size and position of the abscess, and its relationship to nearby organs can be demonstrated. This information may be important when deciding if surgical intervention requir es general or only local anaesthesia. 
Two special clinical features may occur. 
• Pyomyositis, in which the abscesses af fect the muscles. Pyomyositis is 
common between the ages of 5 and 25 , and occurs in patients who live 
in poor conditions, or suffer from HIV and tuberculosis infection. In 90% of cases, the abscesses are caused by Staphylococcus aureus , but 
the reason for their occurrence is unknown. Single muscles or a group 
can be involved (mainly the quadriceps femoris and latissimus dorsi). Sonographically one can depict how many layers are affected and the size and depth of the infection can be described. 
• Buruli ulcer is endemic in central Africa. It is caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans and affects only the upper layers of the skin. 
Kaposi sarcoma Kaposi sarcoma is particularly common in patients with AIDS. It can 
develop in all organs except the ovaries. In 90% of cases the sarcoma is found in males; however, the AIDS-re lated Kaposi sarcoma has no sexual 
preference. Tumour nodes in various forms can be depicted sonographically. The tumour nodes may be present on the skin as well as in internal organs. 
Filariasis Scanning can be helpful to see if the enlarged lymph nodes and 
redundant skin (hanging groi ns) of onchocerciasis are combined with hernias 
or hydroceles. 
122 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 5.6 Jaundice 
Jaundice is a yellow colouring of the skin, mucous membranes and sclera of 
the eyes due to an increase in bilirubin in the blood. Bilirubin is produced 
from the normal breakdown processes of haemoglobin. Bilirubin is normally 
present in small amounts in the blood, but this is clinically undetectable. When jaundice is clinically detectable, this indicates an underlying disorder. 
5.6.1 Types of jaundice 
There are three types of jaundice. 
• Pre-hepatic or haemolytic : due to an increased amount of 
unconjugated bilirubin in the blo od. This may be due to over-
production of bilirubin (haemolysis) or defective conjugation of 
bilirubin in the liver. Haemolysis leads to increased urobilinogen in 
the urine, and the stools may appear slightly darker. 
• Hepatic : due to liver disease. There is an increase of both conjugated 
and unconjugated bilirubin in the blood, and bilirubin appears in the urine. The stool appears normal. 
• Post-hepatic or obstructive : due to obstructed excretion of bile. There 
is an increase of conjugated bilir ubin in the blood, and bilirubin 
appears in the urine. In total obstr uction, the stools appear pale and 
bulky, and there is an absence of urobilinogen in the urine. 
5.6.2 Causes of jaundice The causes of jaundice can be inborn errors of disease, incompatibility 
of blood groups, malnutrition, poisoning, side-effect of drugs, cancer or infections. 
Pre-hepatic or haemolytic jaundice 
• Increased destruction of red cells (haemolysis): malaria, G6PD deficiency, sickle-cell anaemia, Rh esus incompatibility in neonates, 
• Vitamin B12, folic acid deficiency (severe). 
• Immaturity of the liver (neonates, prematurity). 
• Congenital defects (rare). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 123 
Hepatic jaundice 
• Viral infections of the liver: hepatitis A, B, C, E; yellow fever; Marburg/Ebola virus infection, Rift Valley fever, etc. 
• Rickettsial infections of the liver: typhus. 
• Bacterial infections of the liver: typhoid, syphilis, leptospirosis, Borrelia infection (relapsing fever), septicaemia, etc. 
• Parasitic infections of the liver: malaria, toxoplasmosis, Fasciola 
hepatica infestation, Echinococcus cyst, Entamoeba histolytica liver 
abscess, etc. 
• Drugs: isoniazid, phenytoin, meth yldopa, halothane anaesthesia. 
• Chemicals: aflatoxin, alcohol, insecticides, herbal remedies. 
• Tumours of the liver: primary hepatoma, metastatic tumours from other sites. 
Posthepatic or obstructive jaundice • Gall stones. 
• Biliary tract occlusion by Ascaris lumbricoides or Fasciola hepatica . 
• Tumour of the head of the pancreas. 
• Drugs: oral contraceptives, chlorpromazine, etc. 
• Pregnancy (can cause cholestasis). 
• Acute pancreatitis (due to oedema of the head of the pancreas), pancreas carcinoma. 
5.6.3 Investigation of jaundice 
• History fever hair changes vomiting blood (haematemesis) bruising, bleeding from the mucous membranes (mouth, nose, bowel) abdominal pain: type, severity, duration dark urine dark or pale stools skin rash, itching of the skin drug ingestion, recent anaesthesia 
124 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 alcohol ingestion 
pregnancy status family members. 
• Physical examination raised temperature, rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate emaciated condition hair and nail changes skin rash, bruising, striae, excoriations lymphadenopathy abdominal tenderness enlarged liver or spleen ascites distended abdominal veins. 
• Laboratory investigations urine for bilirubin, urobilinogen blood film for parasites, Borrelia 
haemoglobin estimation thin blood film for red cell morphology total and unconjugated serum bilirubin sickle-cell screen stool for ova syphilis screening serum transaminases (ALT, AST) alkaline phosphatase serum amylase hepatitis virus antibodies (HA V , HBV , HCV). 
• Diagnostic imaging 
X-ray for gallstones ultrasound for liver cirrhosis, liver tumours, Echinococcus cysts, 
gallstones and other gall bladder conditions, pancreatic tumour 
or inflammation, enlarged biliary tract system. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 125 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
A summary of the laboratory findings in the different types of jaundice 
are listed in Table 5.10. 
Tests for viruses causing hepatitis (hepatitis B, C, etc) are serological 
tests carried out in laboratories with these facilities. A viral haemorrhagic 
fever screen is carried out by nationa l or regional reference laboratories. 
Viral hepatitis due to hepatitis B and C viruses is a major complication of 
Table 5.10 Laboratory findings in jaundice 
 Pre-hepatic Hepatic Post-hepatic 
Urobilinogen 
Conjugated 
bilirubin Unconjugated 
Indicative results of 
other tests Blood film for 
Hb Sickle-cell screen Thin blood film for sickle cells, megaloblastic 
changes Liver function tests: ALT, AST 
Alkaline phosphatase, amylase, γ-
glutamyl transferase 
HAV, HBV, HCV antibodies Stool for Ascaris lumbricoides ova 
Blood film for parasites, Borrelia 
Syphilis screening test Blood cultures 
Serology for antibodies to E. histolytica 
0: no bilirubin. Test results of semiquantitative tests (urine dipstick): + slightly elevated,++ elevated; +++ strongly elevated; Quantitative measurements in serum: ↑ slightly above normal, ↑↑ elevated, ↑↑↑ 
strongly elevated. 
126 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Toxoplasmosis is usually an asympto matic infection and reactivation 
of the disease is a feature of patients with acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS). The diagnosis is made using a serological test; demonstration of the protozoan in tissues or body fluids is sometimes possible. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging examinations X-ray examination 
Symptoms related to the biliary tract 
Clinical examination of patients with acute abdominal pain originating 
from biliary tract disease may be diff icult, especially in the absence of 
jaundice. However, the medical history combined with clinical and laboratory examinations may point towa rds the biliary tract, and diagnostic 
imaging may be required. The method of choice for evaluating biliary tract 
obstruction is ultrasonography. Where ultrasonography is not available, 
conventional abdominal radiographs including chest X-ray to exclude 
pulmonary causes of upper abdominal pain may be considered; however, diagnostic information is limited to th e detection of radiopaque (calcified) 
structures indicating cholelithiasis. Only about 10% of gall stones are radiopaque . Cholecystography with contrast medium given orally could be 
considered by a well trained radiologist in clinically subacute or chronic 
stages of biliary tract disease, when cl inical and laborat ory findings do not 
give clear evidence for biliary tract obstruction. Cholangiography (intravenously injected contrast medi um) is considered to be risky. 
Ultrasound 
Fatty liver 
In normal patients the liver is only slightly more echogenic than the 
parenchyma of the kidney. Fatty me tamorphosis of the liver shows an 
abnormally echogenic texture of the liver compared with that of the kidney. In fatty metamorphosis the vessels remain normal. This condition is reversible. A fatty liver never causes jaundice. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 127 
Liver cirrhosis 
The end-stage of parenchymal liver disease is not reversible. In liver 
cirrhosis the intrahepatic vessels are not in an orderly and straight fashion and therefore they are difficult to trace. The parenchyma is extremely echogenic, sometimes also irregular. Portal hypertension associated with liver cirrhosis shows an enlarged main portal vein, splendid vein and 
superior mesenteric vein. Ascites ma y be observed. Jaundice may or may not 
occur in liver cirrhosis. 
Intestinal schistosomiasis Intestinal schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma mansoni shows 
specific sonographic features. About 10% of patients develop hepatosplenomegaly with liver fibros is, portal hypertension and ascites. In 
schistosomiasis only the periportal parenchyma is affected, depicting as hyperechogenic areas, whereas the rest of the parenchyma appears almost 
normal. About 30% of patients devel op only hepatosplenomegaly. In these 
patients the differential diagnosis from other tropical diseases causing hepatosplenomegaly is only possible through laboratory examination. 
Note: schistosomiasis never causes jaundice. 
Amoebic liver abscess 
See Section 5.1 on fever. Echinococcus cysts 
See Section 5.12.2 on non-acute abdominal pain. In both conditions jaundice may develo p when the biliary tract system 
is compressed. 
Liver tumours due to primary hepatocellular carcinoma are endemic in 
some areas. Sonographically they are often associated with invasion of the hepatic vein and the inferior vena cava, and these structures need to be examined closely (DD: Echinococcus granulosus , E. 
multilocularis in the 
128 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 northern non-tropical hemisphere). Th e boundary between the malignant and 
normal tissue should be determined to define the degree of infiltration for 
staging purposes. 
Liver metastasis 
Liver metastases may be visible, mainly as round (bull’s eyes) or 
irregular hypoechoic or hyperechoic lesions, or occasionally as diffuse infiltration. In the presence of carcinoma in other parts of the body, liver metastasis should be assessed in order to explore if radical or only palliative surgery shall be performed. 
When the infiltrative growing of hepatomas and metastases are 
reaching the biliary tract system, jaundice usually develops. 
Gallbladder disorders The following disorders may be consid ered if the patient has fasted for 
about 6 hours prior to the examination: 
Cholelithiasis : gallstones of about 2 mm to 3 mm in size can be 
detected, independent of their compos ition. The diagnosis is enhanced by 
acoustic shadowing distal to the gallstone. 
All types of gallstones demonstrate shadowing distal to the 
gallbladder. To elicit a shadow distal to the gallstone, the gallstone must be 
imaged in near normal angulation (perpe ndicular to the skin) to the incident 
beam and within the optimal focal zone of the transducer. 
It is helpful to examine the patient in several positions to mobilize the 
stones. Stones of different sizes can be measured; occasionally the gallbladder is packed with a number of stones and only shadowing can be observed. Jaundice may develop in case of obstruction of the biliary tract system by one or more stones. 
Cholecystitis : in cholecystitis from bacterial infection or in a gall 
bladder containing gallstones the gall bl adder wall is usually thickened; in 
addition there may be distension of the gallbladder. 
Cholecystitis is normally not accompanied by jaundice. Miscellaneous disorders : The most common disorder of the 
gallbladder is “sludge” that is diagnosed by the presence of echogenic 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 129 
material in the gallbladder due to irregul ar emptying. The biliary tract system 
is not involved. 
Gallbladder carcinoma : gallbladder carcinoma is often associated 
with gallstones and can be observed as a focal thickening of the wall. 
Periportal lymph nodes may be enlarg ed. Carcinoma of the gallbladder 
causes jaundice when invading the bile tract. 
Polyps of the gallbladder : polyps appear as echogenic intraluminal 
stationary projections without sh adowing. Gall bladder polyps do not 
normally cause jaundice. 
Demonstration of the pancreas is often difficult and sometimes 
impossible. Perivisceral and mesenteric fat and gas within the bowel can interfere with the examination. In order to get a better picture of the pancreas 
the stomach can be distended with wate r (the patient should drink three or 
four 80 mL glasses of water). 
Acute pancreatitis usually causes an enlarged pancreas with 
intraparenchymal oedema with or with out haemorrhage. The texture of the 
pancreas is hypoechoic or of mixed echogenity. Pancreatic cysts may appear after recovery. The biliary tract system is rarely involved. 
Pancreatic carcinoma may depict as an area of decreased echogenity 
(most often in the head of the pancreas) but it cannot be confidently distinguished sonographically from pancreatitis. If a tumour can be 
identified as such, it is normally at an advanced stage and has often reached 
the biliary tract system. 
Distended bile ducts can be visua lized in obstructive jaundice due to a 
pancreatic tumour, pancreatitis or liv er flukes. Jaundice is always present. 
5.7 Oedema 
Oedema is an accumulation of tissue fluid in the extravascular space 
(outside the bloodstream). Oedema indicates a local obstructive or inflammatory process or a serious underlying systemic disease. 
Oedema may be localized, affecting a limited area or part of the body, 
or generalized, affecting dependent parts of the body. Pleural effusion, 
130 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 peritoneal effusion (ascites) and pericardial effusion are types of oedema 
where tissue fluid is accumulated in body spaces. Pitting oedema is the persistence of indentation of the skin following pressure. 
About one-third of total body water is present in the body outside cells 
(extracellular space). Fluid in the extracellular space consists of plasma (in the bloodstream) and tissue fluid. Norm ally, plasma volume represents about 
25% of the extracellular fluid, and the re mainder is interstitial (tissue) fluid. 
Oedema occurs when fluid is forced from the bloodstream into the tissues, or 
when there is reduced removal of fluid from the tissues by the lymphatic system. This can be due to: • reduced protein concentration in the blood resulting from e.g. malnutrition, liver disease 
• increased pressure in the bloodstream caused by e.g. venous obstruction, cardiac failure 
• reduced removal of fluid from the tissues caused by e.g. obstructed lymphatic vessels 
• damage to capillary blood vessels resulting from e.g. inflammation. 
5.7.1 Causes of oedema 
Localized oedema (see Table 5.11) • Obstruction/poor flow in venous or lymphatic vessels: varicose veins, venous thrombosis, lymphatic filariasis, tumours, cysts, etc. 
• Inflammation of the skin due to: bact erial infection, ulcers, cutaneous 
anthrax, leprosy, trypanosomal chancre, onchocerciasis, Calabar swelling ( Loa loa ), allergies, etc. 
• Puffiness of the face is seen in nephrotic syndrome (that may be caused by Plasmodium malariae or trypanosome infection). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 131 
Table 5.11 Causes of localized oedema 
Obstruction/poor flow in venous or 
lymphatic vessels due to 
varicose veins 
venous thrombosis filariasis 
tumours/cysts: Inflammation due to 
cellulitis 
ulceration trypanosomiasis, Loa loa , onchocerciasis 
cutaneous anthrax leprosy 
hypersensitivity reaction (allergies) 
Blood film for microfilariae/trypanosomes 
Subcutaneous fluid for trypanosomes Skin slit smear for leprosy 
Skin snip for onchocerciasis 
Generalized oedema (see Table 5.12) 
• Insufficient dietary protein (malnutrition): famine, malnutrition, tropical sprue, Giardia lamblia infestation. 
• Loss of protein from the gut: hookworm infestation, tuberculous enteritis. 
• Loss of protein from the kidney: nephrotic syndrome ( P. malariae ), 
glomerulonephritis. 
• Inability to excrete fluid: renal failure. 
• Inability to produce/metabolize protein: hepatic failure. 
• Inability of the heart to pump blood: heart failure due to rheumatic 
heart disease damaging the heart valves, myocardial infarction, congenital heart disease, disease of heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) due to alcohol, vitamin B1 deficiency, filariasis etc. 
• Hypothyroidism: myxoedema. 
5.7.2 Investigation of oedema 
• History fever weight loss or gain diet night sweats 
132 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.12 Causes of generalized oedema 
Inadequate protein 
intake/absorption Protein loss from the gut Protein loss from the kidney Hepatic failure 
Cardiac disease Tuberculous en teritis Inability to excrete 
Famine Hookworm infestation Nephrotic syndrome 
Heart failure due to 
malnutrition, 
rheumatic heart disease, tropical sprue, myocardial 
infarction Glomerulonephritis 
Congenital heart 
disease Renal failure 
Serum protein 
determination 
Protein electrophoresis 
Sputum for acid-fast 
Stool for hookworm 
Urine protein 
determination 
White blood cells in urine Red blood cells in urine 
Casts Tests 
Liver function tests** 
*special investigations: Rf factors, small bowel biopsy. 
**ALT, AST, HBsAg. 
 local pain milky urine dark urine fatty, pale stool cough and sputum allergies drug intake alcohol intake. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 133 
• Physical examination 
raised temperature, rapid or slow pulse, rapid respiratory rate, high 
blood pressure 
wasting weight gain hair colour and texture puffy face skin ulcers, rashes lymphadenopathy tender, inflamed, thickened lymphatic vessels tender/varicose veins enlarged liver or spleen abdominal masses ascites peripheral oedema signs of cardiac failure. 
• Physical examination: adults ankle oedema (on both ankles) crackles in lung bases (fluid) enlarged liver raised jugular venous pressure. 
• Physical examination: infants grunting intercostal or subc ostal retractions 
nasal flaring enlarged liver. 
• Laboratory investigations 
blood film for microfilariae, trypanosomes, Plasmodium malariae 
subcutaneous fluid for trypanosomes skin snip for onchocerciasis skin slit smear for leprosy stool for trophozoites, cysts, ova 
134 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 microscopic examination of urine for protein, white cells, red cells, 
sputum for acid-fast bacilli. Liver function tests (LFTs) include serum 
bilirubin, transaminases, alkaline phosphatase and gamma GT. 
Renal function tests include blood urea, serum creatinine and electrolytes. These are biochemical tests performed in laboratories with these facilities. 
 Thyroid function tests are performed on serum in national or regional reference laboratories. A lymph gland or breast lump may be removed and submitted to a reference laboratory for histopatholog ical examination to demonstrate 
conditions including inflammation, e.g. tuberculosis infection; 
malignancy, e.g. lymphoma, carcinoma of the breast. 
• Diagnostic imaging Ultrasound for liver cirrhosis, ascites, renal abnormalities.
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
Chest X-ray 
See Section 5.4 on cough/shortness of breath. 
Ultrasound 
Nephrotic syndrome Nephrotic syndrome in children is demonstrated as enlargement and 
hyperechogenity of the kidneys. Sono graphic finding may also be seen in 
schistosomiasis, onchocerciasis, tuberc ulosis, liver cirrhosis and others. 
5.8 Urinary tract infection (UTI) 
The urinary tract consists of the urethra, bladder, ureters, pelvis of the 
kidneys and the collecting ducts within the kidney. Urinary tract infections 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 135 
are common and occur more frequently in females than males, except in 
infancy. The organisms causing of urinary tract infection are mainly the following microorganisms: • bacterial infections: Escherichia coli , Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp., 
Enterococcus spp., Pseudomonas spp., Staphylococcus aureus 
• fungal infections: Candida albicans 
• helminthic infections: Schistosoma haematobium . 
Fungal infections occur mainly in immunosuppressed patients. 
Staphylococcus aureus causes abscesses of the kidney and is usually spread 
through the bloodstream. 
Lower urinary tract infections are infections of the urethra and the 
bladder (cystitis). Symptoms include: dysuria (painful or burning micturition), increased frequency of micturition and suprapubic pain. 
Infection occurs by organisms ascending the urethra. 
Upper urinary tract infections include infection of the kidney 
(pyelonephritis). Symptoms include fever and loin pain, as well as symptoms of lower urinary tract infection (dys uria). Infection occurs by organisms 
ascending the urethra or by spread from the bloodstream. 
The symptoms of lower urinary tract infection are often confused with 
the symptoms of urethritis caused by sexually transmitted infections, 
because both cause symptoms of painful urination (dysuria). In many cases the symptoms are identical: however, urinary tract infection is never accompanied by discharge. 
It is important to recognize th ese two separate entities because the 
diagnostic methods, treatment and management of patients are different. 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
Urine examination 
Urine examination is the most poorly ordered of all laboratory 
investigations at primary health care level. Examination of the urine is 
performed for several purposes, and for each purpose a different sample of urine is collected. Tests include: chemical testing for glucose, protein or urobilinogen (spot urine), microscopic ex amination for urethritis (first part 
of the first morning urine), urinary tract infection (midstream urine), 
136 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 tuberculosis (early morning urine), Schistosoma haematobium (terminal 
urine) and microbial culture for dia gnosis of bacteria and assessment of 
antimicrobial drug resistance. Ordering urinalysis without indicating the 
clinical history or test required is not helpful as the laboratory is unable to advise the patient what specimen to collect and is unclear what test to perform. The laboratory should return such requests to the clinician for 
clarification. 
In male patients, dysuria is almost always due to urethritis caused by 
sexually transmitted organisms. Discharge may be absent or reduced due to 
previous inadequate treatment. If there is no obvious discharge, collect a urethral swab for examination. If the sw ab is negative, request the patient to 
collect the first few drops of the first morning urine the next day and bring the sample to the laboratory. The labo ratory will examine the urine deposit 
after centrifugation, and if pus cells are present, a Gram stain should be 
performed to detect Gram-negative intracellular diplococci (presumptive 
evidence of Neisseria gonorrhoeae) . More than 10 pus cells/high power field 
in the absence of Gram-negative in tracellular diplococci indicates non-
gonococcal urethritis (mainly Chlamydia ). 
Ordering an examination of urine with discharge without providing 
information on the medical history of the patient indicates that the relevant examination has not been performed by the clinician, and wastes the time 
and resources of the laboratory and the patient. 
The following factors predispose to urinary tract infections: 
• urethral stricture 
• renal/bladder stones 
• prostatic hypertrophy 
• tumours of the urinary tract 
• bladder catheterization 
• chronic anti-microbial therapy 
• diabetes mellitus 
• pregnancy 
• immunosuppressed patients 
• neurogenic bladder (paralysed patients). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 137 
5.8.1 Investigation of urinary tract infections 
fever painful urination blood in urine (haematuria) difficulty in passing urine (frequency, dribbling, nocturia) history of passing stones previous urethritis due to sexually transmitted infection pregnancy previous drug treatment other systemic disease, e.g. diabetes, immunosuppression. 
• Physical examination raised temperature suprapubic, loin tenderness indwelling catheter pregnancy. 
• Laboratory investigations midstream urine (MSU) for cells, bacteria, casts, crystals random urine for glucose, protein terminal urine for Schistosoma haematobium ova 
total and differential white blood cell count blood glucose. 
5.9 Sexually transmitted infections 
Sexually transmitted infections ar e transmitted mainly (although not 
exclusively) through sexual contact. Sexu ally transmitted infections may be 
caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites. 
The agents that cause sexually tran smitted infections may also be 
transmitted through: • direct contact 
• blood transfusion 
138 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • use of non-sterile, infected needles and instruments 
• from mother to child, either in utero , during delivery or through 
breastfeeding. 
Sexually transmitted infections can result in severe pain and can lead 
to deformity of the genital area and infertility. The local infections may be transmitted by direct contact with the child at the time of delivery, e.g. neonatal conjunctivitis due to Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae , and neonatal pneumonia due to Chlamydia trachomatis , which 
may lead to blindness and death. 
Local infections of the genital tract, especially those that cause 
ulceration, enhance the transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), the virus that causes AIDS. 
Some sexually transmitted infections may lead to severe or fatal 
systemic disease, e.g. syphilis ( Treponema pallidum) , acute septic arthritis 
(Neisseria gonorrhoeae) , HBV infection and HIV infection. Some infections 
may be transmitted to the child in utero (Treponema pallidum , HIV 
infection) leading to congenital abnormalities, abortion and death. 
Some sexually transmitted infections may be alleviated by drug 
therapy but cannot be permanently cured, e.g. Herpes simplex , HIV 
infection. 
5.9.1 Microorganisms causing sexually transmitted infections 
• Viral infection: Herpes simplex , hepatitis B (HBV); human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human papilloma virus (HPV). 
• Chlamydial infection: Chlamydia trachomatis (lymphogranuloma 
venereum). 
• Bacterial infection: Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea), Gardnerella 
vaginalis (bacterial vaginosis), Haemophilus ducreyi (chancroid), 
Treponema pallidum (syphilis), Calymmatobacterium granulomatis 
(lymphogranuloma inguinale). 
• Fungal infection: Candida albicans . 
• Protozoan infection: Trichomonas vaginalis . 
• Ectoparasitic infection: Phthirus pubis (crab lice). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 139 
5.9.2 Types of sexually transmitted infection 
Sexually transmitted infections cause the following major clinical 
syndromes. • Urethral discharge /urethritis : painful urination, urethral discharge 
(common in male patients). Infection of the urethra may spread to involve the seminal vesi cles, epididymis and testes in men; and the 
Bartholin glands in women. Causative agents are: Chlamydia 
trachomatis (watery discharge, painful urination), Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae (thick, pus discharge, painful urination), Trichomonas 
vaginalis (uncommon: watery discharge, often asymptomatic). 
• Vaginal discharge and/or vulval pruritus : painful/burning urination, 
irritating/foul smelling vaginal discharge in women. Agents that cause infection of the vagina are: Candida albicans (white, curdish irritating 
discharge); Trichomonas vaginalis (profuse greenish, frothy, irritating 
discharge); Gardnerella vaginalis (foul smelling, non-irritating 
discharge). 
• Lower abdominal pain in females : pelvic pain with or without vaginal 
discharge. Infection of the cervix spreads to involve the uterus, 
fallopian tubes, ovaries and peritoneum. Main causative agents are: Chlamydia trachomatis (watery discharge), Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
(pus discharge). 
• Genital ulcers : ulceration of the genital organs in men and women 
(including the cervix in women), associated with inguinal lymphadenopathy. Causative agents are: Herpes simplex (painful 
vesicles in crops, recurrent); Haemophilus ducreyi (multiple, painful, 
ragged ulcers), Chlamydia trachomatis (ulcer painless and heals 
quickly, prominent matted inguinal lymphadenopathy), Treponema 
pallidum (usually painless—unless secondarily infected—single 
ulcer), Calymmatobacterium granulomatis (single or multiple, raised, 
painless, beefy papule). 
• Neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum ): conjunctivitis and 
discharge in babies within one month of birth. Causative agents are: 
Chlamydia trachomatis (watery discharge), Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
(pus discharge). Conjunctivitis in neonates may also be due to non-
sexually transmitted infections, e.g. staphylococcus, streptococcus. 
140 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 In addition to these syndromes, there are important systemic diseases 
that are sexually transmitted. 
• Syphilis : a bacterial infection caused by Treponema pallidum which 
occurs in three major stages: primary syphilis: genital ulcer disease secondary syphilis: skin rash, mouth ulcers, fever, lymphadenopathy, 
genital warts tertiary syphilis: cardiac and neurological disease. Between each stage the patient may have long symptom-free periods. Syphilis is transmitted to the fetus in utero after the fourth month of 
pregnancy, resulting in congenital infection and deformity. 
• HIV infection : human immunodeficiency virus is the virus that causes 
AIDS. HIV is transmitted mainly by sexual contact but also through blood transfusion, use of contaminated needles and instruments, and from mother to child, at the time of birth and from breast milk. Infection results in a slow destruction of the body’s immune system resulting in severe infection (opportu nistic infections) and malignancy. 
Infected individuals may remain well for many years before symptoms develop, but they are still infectious to others. 
• Human papilloma virus (HPV) : this virus is associated with the 
development of carcinoma of the uterine cervix. 
5.9.3 Investigation of sexually transmitted infections 
• History fever painful urination urethral or vaginal discharge genital ulcer: pain pelvic/vulval pain or swelling (in women) swelling/pain in genital organs (in men) enlarged inguinal lymph nodes conjunctival discharge (in babies) skin rash mouth ulcers 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 141 
joint pain and swelling 
contacts, partners previous drug treatment. 
• Physical examination raised temperature generalized or ingui nal lymphadenopathy 
skin rash tender, swollen, red joints mouth ulcers conjunctival inflammation and discharge (in babies) pubic lice genital ulcers, swelling genital warts urethral discharge vaginal/cervical discharge (on speculum examination) pelvic tenderness and swelling (on bimanual examination). 
• Laboratory investigations urethral discharge : wet preparation for Trichomonas vaginalis , pus 
cells; Gram stain for pus cells, Gram-negative intracellular diplococci ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) 
first part of the first morning urine : deposit for Trichomonas 
vaginalis , pus cells; Gram stain for pus cells, Gram-negative 
intracellular diplococci ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) 
high vaginal swab (HVS) : wet preparation for Candida albicans , 
Trichomonas vaginalis , “clue cells” ( Gardnerella vaginalis ); 
potassium hydroxide preparation for Candida albicans ; Gram 
stain for Candida albicans , “clue cells” 
endocervical swab (ECS) : Gram stain for pus cells, Gram-negative 
intracellular diplococci ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) 
conjunctival swab : Gram stain for pus cells, Gram-negative 
intracellular diplococci ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) 
dark field illumination of genital ulcer fluid for spirochaetes 
(Treponema pallidum ) 
142 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 serum for syphilis screening 
hepatitis B screening and HIV-antibody testing . 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging 
hysterosalpingography (HSG) for tubal patency. 
Ultrasound 
bladder thickening/calcification 
bladder stones bladder tumours renal cysts hydronephrosis testicular torsion tubo-ovarian abscess pelvic masses advanced carcinoma of the cervix scrotal abnormalities. 
5.9.4 Urethral discharge/urethritis There is a normal “physiological” discharge in all women which 
varies in amount according to the stage of the menstrual cycle. Some women 
are not aware of this, and therefore it is important for the clinician to examine the nature and amount of the discharge. In addition, infection is not the only cause of discharge. Discharge may be due to cervical erosions, malignancy or foreign bodies. Itchy or bloody discharge is always abnormal. Examination of the cervix and vagina in females complaining of discharge is 
an important part of the physical examination. 
Patients of both sexes complaining of dysuria should be asked about the 
presence of discharge. If discharge is present, a full examination of the genital area must be performed by the clinician, wearing gloves. A sample of discharge should be submitted to the laboratory for examination. In male patients, urethral discharge is collected by the clinical or laboratory staff on to a slide or using a 
swab. In female patients, samples of discharge (HVS and ECS) are collected 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 143 
using sterile swabs after direct speculu m examination of the cervix and vagina. 
Speculum examination must be performed by the examining clinician and not 
by a nurse or the laboratory staff. Th e HVS and ECS samples should be clearly 
labelled so that the laboratory can dist inguish them. Urethral swabs may also be 
collected in female patients. The specime ns must be taken immediately to the 
laboratory for examination to detect motile organisms ( Trichomonas vaginalis ). 
Male patients with dysuria (painful urination) are likely to have 
urethritis due to a sexually transmitted infection. Urinary tract infection is uncommon in males. Always question and examine male patients for urethral 
discharge and collect a urethral smear or urethral swab. 
Female patients with dysuria may have a urinary tract infection or a 
sexually transmitted infection causing ur ethritis and/or vaginal discharge. 
Always question female patients about vaginal discharge, and if present, 
investigate accordingly (see Figure 5.3). 
Figure 5.3 Flowchart for the differential diagnosis of urethral 
discharge/dysuria 
144 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Comparison of dysuria caused by UTI and STI 
The diagnosis of UTI is made by considering the following: 
• UTI occurs more commonly in adult female patients 
• there is no history of sexual contact 
• there is no discharge. 
UTI is confirmed by finding >5 pus cells/hpf (high-powered field of 
microscope) in a correctly collected midstream urine (MSU) sample. 
Table 5.13 compares the clinical findings caused by sexually 
transmitted infections (STI) and (UTI). 
5.9.5 Vaginal discharge 
The agents that cause vaginal disch arge may also cause dysuria in 
female patients. Always question female patients with dysuria about vaginal 
discharge. 
Perform speculum examination; examine the cervix; take both a high 
vaginal swab (HVS) and an endocervical swab (ECS) (see Table 5.14). 
5.9.6 Neonatal conjunctivitis 
Gonorrhoeal or chlamydia infection may cause serious disability of 
neonates. Therefore, all neonates with conjunctival discharge must be 
investigated and treated promptly, in order to avoid blindness. The differential diagnosis of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia infection is 
outlined in Table 5.15. 
5.9.7 Lower abdominal pain in women 
Figure 5.4 presents a flow diagram for the symptomatic diagnosis of 
lower abdominal pain in women. 
5.9.8 Genital ulcers 
Genital ulcers may cause dysuria in both male and female patients. 
Always examine the patient carefully. Genital ulcers in females may occur 
on the cervix or the walls of the vagina. Genital ulcers due to syphilis (Treponema pallidum ) may be painful if they are secondarily infected with 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 145 
Table 5.13 Dysuria caused by sexually transmitted infections and 
urinary tract infections 
Symptom Dysuria Dysuria 
Presence of 
urethral/vaginal discharge Yes No 
Common causative organisms N. gonorrhoea 
C. trachomatis 
T. vaginalis E. coli 
Proteus spp. 
Klebsiella spp. 
Enterococcus spp. 
Pseudomonas spp., 
Source of organisms Infected partner Bowel flora 
Mode of transmission Sexual contact Local spread/ 
contamination 
Mode of spread of disease Genital tract Urinary tract Sex ratio M:F = 1:1 F > M Age group affected Sexually active group All ages, including 
babies, children and the 
Laboratory tests Urethral smear, swab, 
HVS/ECS Midstream urine (MSU) 
Treatment Penicillin 
Ampicillin 
Septrin Septrin 
Ampicillin 
Dosage regimens High single dose 3–7 days 
Treatment of contact Yes No 
146 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.14 Differential diagnosis and treatment of vaginal discharge 
 High vaginal swab Endocervical swab 
Wet preparation 
10% KOH preparation 
Gram stain Test 
Gram stain 
Yeast positive Findings 
Clue cells 
+ve KOH test Findings 
Trichomonas 
vaginalis Findings 
Pus cells: Gram-
negative intracellular 
diplococci 
Candidiasis treatment Treatment 
Bacterial vaginosis treatment Treatment 
Trichomonas treatment Treatment 
First line 
gonorrhoea and 
Follow up after seven days 
Table 5.15 Diagnosis of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia 
trachomatis infection 
Gram stain of discharge 
Gram-negative intracellular diplococci 
(GNID) Findings 
No Gram-negative intracellular diplococci 
Treat for gonorrhoea, neonatal conjunctivitis Treatment 
Examine and treat mother 
and her contacts for 
gonorrhoea and Chlamydia Treatment 
Treat for Chlamydia, 
neonatal conjunctivitis 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 147 
Lower abdominal pain (without bowel symptoms, e.g. diarrhoea) 
Abdominal rebound 
tenderness or guarding → yes → Possible acute abdomen 
Last menstrual period overdue → yes → Possible ectopic pregnancy 
Recent delivery or abortion → yes → Possible retention or products sepsis 
Vaginal bleeding → yes → Possible threatened abortion 
Vaginal discharge yes → Follow protocol for vaginal discharge 
Intrauterine device (IUD) → yes → Treat for gonorrhoea and Chlamydia . 
If symptoms persist, consider removing IUD 
Fever 38 °C 
Painful bimanual pelvic examination → yes → Treat for gonorrhoea and Chlamydia 
Pelvic mass → yes → Requires further investigation 
Advise patient to return for re-evaluation if the pain persists 
Figure 5.4 A flow diagram for the symptomatic diagnosis of lower 
abdominal pain in women 
148 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Examination of genital ulcers 
Screening tests for syphilis (VDRL) may be negative in the early 
stages of the disease (primary chancre) as antibodies have not yet developed 
(see Figure 5.5). Early and effective treatment may prevent the development of antibodies. Screening tests are always positive in secondary syphilis. 
Screening tests may become negative or weak during the late stages of 
the disease due to reduced activity of Treponema pallidum . In late stages of 
syphilis (and in patients with suspected central nervous system involvement) a specific test, e.g. TPHA ( Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay), 
must always be performed. 
The VDRL (or RPR) test is a screening test for syphilis, and consists 
of non-specific antigen (cardiolipin) coated on to carbon antigen particles. 
Patients with syphilis develop antibodies that cause the particles to agglutinate. Since the antigen used is not derived from T. pallidum , non-
specific (false positive) reactions may occur; however, this may be of little significance as the treatment of sy philis is simple and economical. 
False positive screening tests for syphilis may occur in malaria, 
tuberculosis, leprosy, pregnancy, hepatitis, malignancy, lupus erythematosus, etc. 
Vesicular lesions Genital ulcer Matted inguinal lymph 
nodes, small genital 
Herpes simplex Papilloma virus Dark field microscopy (may be repeated every 3 days) Lymphogranuloma venereum 
Appropriate management Spirochaetes 
pallidum No 
spirochaetes Chlamydia treatment 
treatment Syphilis and 
Figure 5.5 Diagnosis of genital ulcers 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 149 
The VDRL test is also a very useful test because it provides a measure 
of the activity of the disease. In order to quantify antibodies, the patient’s 
serum is diluted until the agglutina tion reaction disappears (titration). 
Genital ulcers and all features of secondary syphilis heal 
spontaneously without treatment. A VD RL titre is carried out to determine 
the patient’s response to treatment. Patients who are treated for syphilis should have the VDRL titre checked every three to six months until antibodies can no longer be detected. T. pallidum cannot be cultured on 
artificial media. 
Congenital syphilis can be prevented by treating syphilis in pregnant 
women before the fourth month of pre gnancy. After the fourth month, the 
T. pallidum organism crosses the placenta and can infect the fetus. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investi gations of the female genital tract 
Conventional radiography is of very little value for evaluating 
gynaecological problems. In small hospitals and clinics the only imaging technique of value is ultrasonography . Special radiological examinations 
such as hysterosalpingography (HSG) should only be considered when a radiologist is available. Patients with complex clinical symptoms and malignant disease should be transferred to hospitals with facilities for computer tomography examinations before planning surgical intervention or radiotherapy. 
Ultrasound 
The chronic stage of urogenital schistosomiasis, caused by 
Schistosoma haematobium , shows typical sonographic features. The wall of 
the bladder is thickened and irregul ar with fibrotic bladder tissue. 
Calcification of the bladder wall may be visible. In more advanced stages, 
various findings are possible, such as contraction (shrinking) of the bladder, and dilation or deformity of the distal ureter, which may cause hydronephrosis. In addition, bladder stones may be present. There is a 
150 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 proven link between schistosomiasis a nd bladder carcinoma in endemic 
In chronic sexually transmitted infection in males, there may be 
thickening of the bladder wall. Hydrone phrosis may be a late manifestation 
of urethral stricture. Another cause of urinary obstruction is an enlarged 
prostate. The size of the prostate can be measured by ultrasonography. 
Prostate cancer is shown by tissue with different echoes and an irregular border, sometimes infiltrating the surrounding organs. 
Although the most commonly used probe is not very specific for 
scrotal scanning, hydroceles can be differentiated from inflammatory processes and big tumours. Hydroceles appear as fluid around the testicle. Tumours show a disorganized texture; in an inflammatory process the testicles appear thickened. 
Torsion of the testes exhibits an irregular texture with echogenic areas 
corresponding to haemorrhage, but it is difficult to make the diagnosis in the early stages with the normally used transducer. 
Late stages of sexually transmitted infection in women with acute or 
chronic pelvic inflammation show various features that may be difficult to 
differentiate on transabdominal scanning. Transvaginal scanning is preferred to demonstrate pelvic organs but this t ype of probe is not usually available. 
A tubo-ovarian abscess appears as a mass with low-level echoes 
arising from the inflammatory fluid. Fluid in the pouch of Douglas is common. In late stages of sexually transmitted infection, complex pelvic masses may occur which can fill the en tire pelvis, and which contain fluid 
and/or solid masses, pus, clots or cellu lar debris. The differential diagnosis 
of extrauterine pregnancy can be extr emely difficult (see Section 5.13.3 on 
complicated pregnancy). 
Scanning is only helpful in advanced stages of cervical cancer. 
Typically enlargement and irregularity of the borders of the cervix and infiltration of the bladder are seen. Stenosis of the cervix due to carcinoma may give the appearance of a distended uterus with haematometra. 
Congenital abnormalities of the kidne y such as congenital polycystic 
kidney disease can also lead to urinary tr act infection. Solitary cysts of the 
kidney are often noted with no other renal abnormality. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 151 
5.10 Altered consciousness, coma and shock 
A patient with altered consci ousness may present himself as 
aggressive, excited, in a state of delirium or unconsciousness. The altered 
consciousness of a patient should be considered as highly critical. An unconscious patient is in a state of shock or coma, that are life threatening. The causes of shock and coma are different as is their treatment. Both conditions require immediate intensive care that should be monitored using 
the appropriate clinical and laboratory indicators. Table 5.16 summarizes the causes of altered consciousness. 
5.10.1 Investigation of altered consciousness 
headache photophobia vomiting fever head injury history of diabetes history of hypertension history of renal disease alcohol or other drug abuse use of local herbal remedies exposure to chemicals, carbon monoxide pregnancy history of epilepsy. 
• Physical examination level of consciousness and orientation increased temperature, rapid or slow pulse, rapid/laboured breathing, 
blood pressure (hypertension/hypotension) 
head wound bulging fontanelle neck stiffness, Kernig sign, photophobia 
152 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
Grand mal convulsion 
Brain tumour Eclampsia 
History of epilepsy 
Subdural haematoma 
Raised blood pressure Unequal pupils History of renal disease 
 Head injury 
Extradural haematoma 
Hypertensive encephalopathy 
Head wound Focal signs Kernig sign 
Carbon monoxide 
Alcohol Chemicals Opiates Drug overdose Local herbs 
Focal signs 
Hypoglycaemia 
Hyperglycaemia 
History of diabetes Insulin use Hypoglycaemic drugs 
Blood glucose 
Urine chemistry and microscopy Serum creatinine/blood 
urea Table 5.16 Causes of altered consciousness 
Meningitis 
Malaria Septicaemia Brain abscess Trypanosomiasis 
Fever Neck stiffness Unequal pupils Bulging fontanelle Kernig sign 
Blood film for parasites 
Cerebrospinal fluid for total and differential WBC Gram stain Ziehl–Neelsen stain Negative stain Cerebrospinal fluid protein Cerebrospinal fluid 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 153 
pupils: dilated, constric ted, non-reactive, unequal 
papilloedema, retinal exudates, retinal haemorrhages 
focal weakness/paralysis urine retention/incontinence. 
• Laboratory investigations blood haemoglobin, haematocrit blood film for parasites gram stain, Ziehl–Neelsen stain, negative staining blood glucose blood gases serum urea, serum potassium serum creatinine serum transaminases plasma clotting factors cerebrospinal fluid for protein, total white cell count, differential white 
cell count, trypanosomes, 
cerebrospinal fluid culture and antimicrobial sensitivity urine ketone bodies urine glucose urine pH urine osmolality cross-match. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging 
Skull X-ray for fractures (see Section 5.11 on accidents and injuries). 
5.10.2 Shock 
Shock is a critical condition in which the circulatory system fails to 
maintain adequate blood flow. This sharply curtails the delivery of oxygen 
and nutrients to vital organs. It also compromises the kidney and so curtails 
154 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 the removal of wastes from the body. Shock is a major medical emergency. It 
is common after blood loss from serious injury. 
Shock may result from: 
• insufficient cardiac output of bl ood to maintain blood pressure 
• disproportionate distribution of blood between organs of the body. Table 5.17 summarizes the common causes and laboratory findings of 
various forms of shock. 
Typical clinical signs of a shock are low blood pressure and 
tachycardia; rapid but weak pulse; low to absent urine production; tachypnoea; confusion; stupor. In the m ilder form of shock the patient may 
still be conscious, but confused and reac ting slowly. Hands and feet may feel 
cold and moist and appear pale or cy anotic. In heavy shock the patient is 
unconscious. 
The diagnostic indicators for monitoring shock treatment are ECG, 
blood pressure, Hb, RBC, blood glucos e, blood gases and urine volume. 
5.10.3 Coma 
Coma is a state of unconsciousness from which the patient cannot be 
aroused, even by powerful stimuli. Th e coma may be accompanied by signs 
of delirium. In deep coma, even prim itive body reflexes cannot be triggered. 
Relative degrees of coma include stupor and drowsiness, although there is no clear distinction between them. The leve l of coma can be defined using the 
Blantyre Coma Scale as follows. 
Best motor response Localizes painful stimulus (pressu re with blunt end of pencil on 
sternum or supra-orbital ridge) 2 
Withdraws limb from painful stimulus (pressure with horizontal pencil on nailbed of finger or toe) 1 
No response or inappropriate response 0 
Best verbal response 
Cries or speaks appropriately with painful stimulus 2 
Moans or abnormal cry with painful stimulus 1 No vocal response to painful stimulus 0 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 155 
Eye movement 
Watches or follows (e.g. mother’s face) 1 
Fails to watch or follow 0 
Maximum score 5 
Minimum score 0 
Diabetic coma is caused by impaired glucose and fatty acid 
metabolism. The early signs include weight loss, nausea, confusion, gasping for breath and a characteristically sweet foetor similar to that of acetone (“acetone breath”). 
There are three forms of diabetic coma: hyperosmolar, ketoacidotic 
and hypoglycaemic coma. The clinical and laboratory indicators to distinguish between the different forms of diabetic coma are shown in Table 5.18. 
A patient suffering from hyperosmolar coma may still react despite of 
the highly elevated blood glucose levels. 
In severe cases of viral (e.g. HBV , yellow fever virus, haemorrhagic 
fever viruses) or protozoan (e.g. Plasmodium falciparum ) infection patients 
may suffer from high fever and hepatic failure, accompanied by jaundice and coma. Complications of liver cirrhosis from chronic HBV infection include mental confusion, coma, fluid accumulation (ascites), internal bleeding and kidney failure. 
Encephalitis in viral infection with high fever and convulsions may 
also result in a coma. Occasionally th e encephalitis may eventuate in central 
nervous system impairment or death. 
156 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.17 Common causes of shock 
Type of shock Common causes Laboratory findings 
Hypovolemic shock Acute blood loss, e.g. from 
peptic ulcer, aortic 
aneurism, extra-uterine gravidity, septic abortion, trauma, surgery Loss of body fluid, e.g. in acute diarrhoea, kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, cholera Acute adrenal insufficiencyDrug effect (e.g. diuretic 
drug treatment) Hb normal to low 
HCT normal to low 
Serum electrolytes Creatinine high Blood glucose very low 
Urine ketone high 
Cardiogenic shock Cardiac arrhythmia 
Myocardial infarction Pulmonary embolism Hb normal 
HCT normal 
Enzymes (CK, AST, ALT) elevated 
LDH very high 
Vasodilatation 
(relative hypovolemic 
i. neurogenic shock Cerebral trauma 
ii. septic shock Bacterial infection with 
fever and shivering (in 
severe cases no fever and shivering) WBC high to very low 
Respiratory alkalosis 
iii. Dengue shock syndrome and 
haemorrhagic fever Dengue virus 
Haemorrhagic fever 
viruses Thrombopenia 
leukopenia 
iv. anaphylactic shock Allergic reaction 
v. acute adverse blood 
transfusion reaction ABO incompatibility reactions ABO blood groups and cross-match 
Urine haemoglobin 
vi. toxic shock Staphylococcus aureus 
toxin, poisons 
medicinal herbs Serum transaminases 
Plasma clotting factors 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 157 
Table 5.18 Clinical and laboratory findings in diabetic coma 
 Hyperosmolar 
coma Ketoacidotic coma Hypoglycaemic 
Development hours days minutes 
Preceding stress or 
fever often often absent 
Physical condition very sick extremely sick very weak 
Breathing normal to 
tachypnoeic very deep 
(Kussmaul type) normal 
Skin very dry dry and red moist and pale 
Infection frequent frequent absent Mouth dry dry saliva increased Thirst pronounced pronounced absent Vomitus occasionally frequent rare Abdominal pain occasionally frequent absent Breath accelerated accelerated normal and flat Foetor no acetone acetone no acetone Blood pressure low low normal Urine glucose elevated elevated absent Urine ketones normal elevated absent Urine osmolality >360 mOsmol/L <320 mOsmol/L Blood glucose >500 mg/dL (>30 
mmol/L) >300 mg/dL (<18 
mmol/L) <50 mg/dL (<3 mmol/L) 
Serum bicarbonate elevated < 10 meq/L >22 meq/L 
Serum potassium elevated elevated low 
158 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Poisoning may be more common than is currently recognized. 
Poisoning may be accidental or deliberate from ingestion of toxic foods or 
chemicals, overdoses of drugs or medicinal herbs or to exposure to toxic gases. A common cause of poisoning is carbon monoxide, a tasteless gas 
formed during combustion in the absence of sufficient oxygen. Carbon monoxide poisons by preferentially binding to haemoglobin. Carbon 
monoxide poisoning may be more common than is currently recognized. Patients may have symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning but be unaware 
of the reasons for their symptoms. The early symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning are nonspecific. They incl ude prolonged headache and nausea. 
Advanced exposure to carbon monoxide r esults in cardiovascular collapse, 
coma and death. 
A person with heat stroke has a body temperature above 41 °C. Other 
symptoms include confusion, combativeness, bizarre behaviour, faintness, staggering, strong rapid pulse, dry flushed skin, lack of sweating, delirium and coma. 
Haemolytic–uraemic syndrome is a condition involving break-up of 
red blood cells and kidney failure. There is clumping of platelets within the kidneys’ small blood vessels with resultant reduced blood flow. This leads to kidney failure. Haemolytic–uraemic syndrome is the most common cause of acute kidney failure in infants and young children. 
There are many causes of haemolytic–uraemic syndrome including 
Shigella , drugs, tumours, pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE). One of the most prominent causes today of haemolytic–uraemic syndrome is Escherichia coli O157:H7. 
Typically patients with haemolytic–uraemic syndrome suffer from 
anaemia and thrombocytopenia, whic h causes abnormal bleeding. Seizures 
and coma can also occur. Cases ty pically begin with severe abdominal 
cramps and diarrhoea, which may become bloody by the second or third day. Nausea and vomiting are present in approximately half of the patients. Most patients recover in seven to ten days, but some go on to develop the severe from of the disease. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 159 
Guidelines for laboratory investigations 
A patient who presents in altered consciousness requires an immediate 
assessment and immediate therapy to prevent further nervous system 
damage. Treatment requires repeated clinical control (ECG, pulse rate, blood 
pressure) and laboratory measurements of metabolic indicators (e.g. haemoglobin, RBC, blood and urine glucose, urea, potassium and urine ketone bodies) and blood gases (if availabl e) at frequent intervals to monitor 
the success of treatment of the patient. 
Hypertension is only recognised clinically by blood pressure 
examination. The patient may not be aware of having underlying 
hypertension. 
Ketones may be seen in urine in h ealthy fasting individuals, or in 
patients who are not eating because of nausea or vomiting, or other illness; ketones together with glucose in urine indicates diabetic ketoacidosis. 
A blood glucose level less than 2.8 mmol/L (50 mg/dl) during a 
symptomatic episode indicates hypoglycaemia. 
Repeated laboratory measurements of metabolic indicators are 
required at frequent intervals, e.g. glucose, urea, to monitor the success of treatment. 
Central nervous system disease in patients with acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome (AIDS) may be due to the effects of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) itself, to infection or malignancy. HIV virus causes dementia. Opportunistic infe ctions include encephalitis due to 
cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex; meningitis due to Cryptococcus 
neoformans; brain abscess due to Toxoplasma gondii ; and brain tumour, e.g. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
Less than 0.5% of acute headaches are due to serious intracranial 
disease. Consequently, patients with headache but no additional neurological 
symptoms normally do not need diagnostic imaging of any kind. 
Patients with suspected intracranial disease should be transferred to a 
hospital where CT, cerebral angiograp hy and possibly MRI examinations can 
be performed, and where the necessary treatment can be given. 
160 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 5.11 Accidents and injuries 
An injury or accident is an event that occurs suddenly and requires 
immediate attention, to prevent worsening of the condition, to prevent 
complications, such as infection, and sometimes to save life. 
5.11.1 Types of accident or injury 
For practical purposes, accidents and injuries may be grouped as 
• trauma to the head 
• trauma to the chest 
• trauma to the abdomen 
• trauma to the skeleton and soft tissues 
• multiple trauma. 
Other accidents that do not involve trauma include: 
• poisoning 
• burns and scalds 
• emergencies occurring in childbirth (see section 5.12.2 on complicated 
pregnancy). 
5.11.2 Investigation of accidents and injuries 
• History nature of accident, sequence of events time of accident headache visual disturbance difficulty in breathing vomiting: colour, amount pain: site bleeding: site and intensity limited movement of limbs, loss of sensation confusion, loss of consciousness seizures 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 161 
pre-treatment 
contact with poisons (swallowed, i nhaled, absorbed through the skin, 
instilled into the eye, injected). 
• Physical examination vital signs: temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respirations level of consciousness (see Section 5.10.3 on coma) pupils: size, equal, reactive eye: burns, lacerations skin: burns, lacerations bones: crepitation, swelling foreign bodies examination of relevant systems. 
• Laboratory investigations haemoglobin urine for blood blood grouping. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging investigations 
X-rays are often requested for investigation of head injuries. In 
general, however, conventional skull X-rays are of very limited value 
because dangerous and often life threatening intracranial injuries are normally not visible. The lack of skull fractures does not say anything about damage to the brain or other intracranial structures. 
Suspected facial injuries do justify X-ray examination. In addition, 
unconscious patients should have an X-ra y examination of the cervical spine. 
An absolute minimum would be a lateral view performed with a mobile X-ray unit. 
Foreign bodies located in the eye can be demonstrated when they are 
metallic or otherwise radiopaque. 
162 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
Patients with chest trauma should be examined radiologically to 
evaluate possible lesions of the lungs and mediastinal structures. A plain chest radiograph will exclude pneumothorax, atelectasis, pleural fluid collection and other serious damage. The diagnostic quality of images and 
radiation safety are more difficult to ensure using mobile X-ray units, and 
wherever possible the patient should be examined in an X-ray department 
using stationary equipment. Only very few patients are in a condition preventing them from transportation to the X-ray unit for imaging. 
A chest X-ray to exclude a simple rib fracture is not indicated in most 
cases. In the absence of serious injuries or symptoms, a rib fracture can be easily diagnosed by clinical examin ation. High-quality radiographs are 
needed for the diagnosis of pneumothorax or other lesions. 
Abdomen Abdominal trauma requires extensiv e diagnostic examination, which 
may be difficult. 
In the absence of external or penetrating injuries, it may be impossible 
to diagnose intra-abdominal injuries with certainty, although medical staff may be able to indicate the likelihoo d of such injuries. In these cases, 
additional diagnostic examinations are required to obtain more exact 
information. 
Conventional abdominal X-ray examin ations should be considered if 
ultrasound is not available, as they can offer valuable information on intra-abdominal lesions. These examinations may not be of sufficiently high quality when made under emergency conditions. If more sophisticated radiological examinations, including the use of contrast medium and abdominal computer tomography are not available, surgical intervention, such as exploratory laparotomy, may be required. 
Skeleton Although most injuries of the skeleton are diagnosed clinically, it may 
be difficult to give adequate treatme nt without information from diagnostic 
imaging. Mobile X-ray units are ofte n not suitable for producing images of 
adequate diagnostic quality even when op erated by skilled personnel. This is 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 163 
true for injuries and fractures of the pelv is, the hips and lumbar spine, where 
lateral projections are of great importance. 
At least two projections positioned at right angles to each other are 
required. Special views may be necessar y according to the type and location 
of the injury/fracture. The X-ray op erator should discuss the clinical 
situation of the patient with the clinic ian in order to tailor the examination 
Ultrasound 
Patients with abdominal trauma who are suspected to be suffering internal 
lesions should have their abdomens examined as soon as possible. Sonography can be performed at the same time as life-saving treatment. The examination does not require any special preparation of the patient, although 
gas in the bowel often makes examinati ons difficult. Most intra-abdominal 
lesions such as intraperitoneal bleeding, severe injuries of the liver, spleen 
and kidneys can be identified within minutes by adequately trained personnel. 
Splenic rupture and haematomas a ppear as echogenic and later, hypo-
echoic masses within or outside the spleen. Surrounding fluid represents partial rupture or laceration of the spleen. 
Renal contusion and laceration have a variable appearance. 
Haematomas appear as hypoechoic masses within or surrounding the kidney. At a later stage they become echogenic. 
Joints Ultrasound cannot be used to evaluate injuries of the skeleton. 
However ultrasound can be used for examin ation of the joints. Intra-articular 
fluid, including accumulation of blood or pus in the joint, may be difficult to 
diagnose on physical examination, especially in the shoulder and hip joints. In such cases, a well trained ultrasonog raphy operator will be able to make 
the diagnosis provided that the appropriate probe is available. It is, however, 
not possible to specify the type of fluid in a joint, and fluid aspiration is needed to obtain more information. 
164 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
Sonographic examination of the chest is usually made with the patient 
sitting in a stationary chair leaning forward on a pillow. Pleural fluid should be collected on inspiration and expiration. Normally, the air-containing lung produces an echogenic interface at the thoracic wall. Effusions appear as hypoechoic accumulations between the thoracic wall and the lung. Simple effusions tend to change in configur ation with respiration. Paradoxical 
motion of the diaphragm may also be documented. 
Ultrasound can be used to delineate lesions of muscles, fascia and 
ligaments such as complete tears and haematomas (although this needs special training and a 75 MHz transducer). 
5.12 Acute and non-acute abdomen 
5.12.1 Acute abdominal pain 
Acute abdomen is a serious abdo minal crisis of acute onset 
characterized by pain and usually associated with vomiting, abdominal distension, fever and altered bowel function. Acute abdomen may be 
associated with shock, where there is acute circulatory failure marked by 
coldness of the skin, hypotension and tachycardia. A patient with acute 
abdomen may have a serious underlying disease which could lead to a fatal outcome. Early evaluation and appropriate therapy (including surgical intervention) must be carried out without delay. Acute abdomen may occur in pregnancy. In pregnancy, the positio n of the appendix may be altered due 
to the enlarged uterus. 
Acute abdomen is not a diagnosis in it self, but is a term applied to an 
acute abdominal crisis which may be due to one of many causes. The causes of acute abdomen include: • Acute intestinal obstruction : e.g. intussusception, strangulated/ 
incarcerated hernia, mass of Ascaris lumbricoides (in children), bowel 
torsion, volvulus, adhesions. 
• Inflammation of abdominal organs : e.g. gastroenteritis, acute 
appendicitis, acute cholecystitis , acute pancreatitis, pyelitis/ 
pyelonephritis, acute mesenteric adenitis, acute salpingitis/ 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 165 
pyosalpinx, ruptured liver abscess, severe amoebic colitis, 
complication after laparotomy. 
• Perforation with spreading peritonitis : e.g. perforated peptic ulcer, 
perforated gut (e.g. typhoid perfora tion), ruptured tubal (ectopic) 
pregnancy. 
• Vascular and tubular structures obstruction/leakage : e.g. ureteric colic 
(stone in ureter), biliary colic, twisted ovarian cyst, acute mesenteric thrombosis, leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
• Non-surgical abdominal crisis : e.g. sickle-cell crisis, malaria, diabetic 
crisis, acute porphyria, lobar pne umonia, myocardial infarction, 
Herpes zoster , tertiary syphilis ( Treponema pallidum ), familial 
Mediterranean fever, period ic syndrome in children. 
5.12.2 Non-acute abdominal pain 
Non-acute abdominal pain lasts typically more than several days, and 
often several weeks duration. It is not excessively severe, and is usually not accompanied by high fever. Many causes of non-acute abdominal pain can be diagnosed by correct investigation, and treatment or cure is available. In some cases there may be progression to a severe abdominal disorder if the condition is not treated early. 
Causes of non-acute abdominal pain or discomfort include: 
• peptic ulcer disease, e.g. gastric, duodenal ulcer, hiatus hernia 
• chronic pancreatitis, e.g. recurrent acute pancreatitis due to alcohol 
ingestion, gall stones, etc. 
• small intestinal infections, e.g. Ascaris lumbricoides, hookworm, 
Strongyloides stercoralis, Giardia lamblia, tuberculous enteritis 
• large intestinal (colorectal) infections, e.g. Entamoeba 
histolytica /dispar, Schistosoma mansoni , Trichuris trichiura 
• hepatitis, e.g. viral, bacterial, pa rasitic causes (see Section 5.6 on 
• biliary disease, e.g. cholecystitis 
• diseases with tender hepatosplenomegaly, e.g. malaria (tropical splenomegaly syndrome), visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar), Schistosoma mansoni, Echinococcus cysts, brucellosis, malignant 
lymphoma, chronic leukaemia 
166 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • pelvic masses, e.g. fibroids, ovarian cysts 
• malignancy, e.g. gastric, hepatic, pancreatic, ovarian, renal tumours, 
teratoma, abdominal Burkitt lymphoma. 
Tables 5.19 and 5.20 summarize the causes and clinical and diagnostic 
findings of acute and non-acute abdominal pain respectively. 
5.12.3 Investigation of acute abdomen and non-acute 
abdominal pain 
• History fever vomiting, haematemesis localized/generalized abdominal pain abdominal cramps, con tinuous or intermittent 
loin pain abdominal distension constipation, no passage of wind diarrhoea, blood in stool dysuria, haematuria vaginal discharge, vaginal bleeding amenorrhoea previous surgery previous similar episodes. 
• Physical examination general condition (acutely ill; in pain; wasted) posture (unable to stand; leaning forward) raised temperature, low blood pressure dehydration pallor, jaundice abdominal distension, localized/g eneralized tenderness, guarding, 
rebound tenderness 
surgical scars abdominal mass 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 167 
Table 5.19 Causes and clinical and diagnostic findings in acute 
abdominal pain 
Intestinal 
obstruction Main causes 
Strangulated/incarcerated 
hernia Intussusception Mass of Ascaris 
lumbricoides Bowel torsion 
Adhesions Signs/symptoms 
Intermittent colicky pain 
Continuous vomiting, stomach contents (bile, faecal matter) Constipation (no wind) Distended abdomen Visible peristalsis Generalized/localized tenderness Cough tenderness: hernial rings, male genitalia High-pitched tinkling soundsMass on rectal examinationStool mucoid/bloody 
A. lumbricoides ova Tests 
X-ray: gas, fluid levels 
Ultrasound 
Inflammation of 
abdominal organs Main causes 
Gastroenteritis 
Acute appendicitis Acute cholecystitis Acute pancreatitis Pyelitis/pyelonephritis Acute mesenteric adenitis 
Acute salpingitis/pyosalpinx Signs/symptoms 
Localized pain (pointing test)
Pain becomes worse Vomiting with pain Diarrhoea (gastroenteritis) Fever Tenderness on superficial/deep palpation Abdominal rigidity/guardingRebound tenderness Abdominal mass Vaginal discharge Cervical excitation Tender pelvic mass Rectal examination tenderness 
Raised temperature Tests 
Urine: pus cells, red cells, 
casts, bacteria, parasites Stool for red cells, pus cells, characteristic bacteria 
ECS: pus cells, GNID Total and differential white blood cell count 
Ultrasound 
Perforation Main causes 
Perforated peptic ulcer 
Perforated bowel, e.g. typhoid 
Ruptured tubal pregnancy Signs/symptoms 
Excruciating pain not 
relieved by analgesics Shoulder tip pain Amenorrhoea Board-like rigidity 
Silent abdomen Tests 
Pregnancy test positive 
X-ray: free gas under diaphragm 
Ultrasound 
168 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 5.19 Causes and clinical and diagnostic findings in acute 
abdominal pain (concluded) 
Vascular/tubular 
obstruction/ leakage Main causes 
Ureteric colic 
Biliary colic Twisted ovarian cyst Acute mesenteric thrombosis Leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Signs/symptoms 
Intermittent colicky pain 
Severe localized abdominal/loin pain Tenderness on superficial/deep palpation 
Abdominal rigidity/guarding Tests 
Urine: pus cells, red cells, 
crystals X-ray: gallstones/ureteric opacities (stones) 
Ultrasound 
Non-surgical Main causes 
Sickle-cell crisis 
Malaria Diabetic crisis Acute porphyria Lobar pneumonia Myocardial infarction Herpes zoster 
Familial Mediterranean feverSigns/symptoms 
Tenderness on 
superficial/deep palpation Bronchial breathing 
Skin vesicles Tests 
Urine and blood sugar 
Sickle-cell screen Blood for malaria VDRL Chest X-ray 
Ultrasound 
enlarged liver, spleen absent, tinkling or increased bowel sounds rectal examination: mass, tenderness vagina/cervix (on speculum examination): pus, blood pelvis (on bimanual examination) : tenderness, tender pelvic mass, 
cervical excitation. 
A person with heat stroke has a body temperature above 41 °C. Other 
symptoms include confusion, combativeness, bizarre behaviour, faintness, staggering, strong rapid pulse, dry flushed skin, lack of sweating, delirium and coma. 
Haemolytic–uraemic syndrome is a condition involving break-up of 
red blood cells and kidney failure. There is clumping of platelets within the kidneys’ small blood vessels with reduced blood flow. This leads to kidney failure. Haemolytic–uraemic syndrome is the most common cause of acute kidney failure in infants and young children. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 169 
Miscellaneous 
Renal tumours 
Burkitt lymphoma 
Ultrasound Enteric infection 
A lumbricoide s 
T. trichiura 
S. stercoralis 
G. lamblia 
E. histolytica/ 
dispar Tuberculous enteritis 
S. manson i 
Stool for trophozoites, cysts, ova 
Ultrasound Pelvic disease 
Ovarian cysts Ovarian 
Ultrasound Hepatospleno-
Kala azar S. mansoni 
Echinococcus cyst 
Brucellosis Leukaemia/ 
Blood film for parasites Total and differential WBC Peripheral blood film Splenic aspirate for LD bodies Stool for ova 
Ultrasound Hepatic/biliary 
Cholecystitis 
Liver function tests 
Cholecystogram Pancreatic disease 
pancreatitis 
Ultrasound Table 5.20 Causes, clinical and diagnostic findings in non-acute abdominal pain 
Peptic ulcer 
Gastric ulcer 
Duodenal ulcer Hiatus hernia 
Gastric carcinoma 
Barium swallow 
170 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 There are many causes of haemolytic–uraemic syndrome including 
Shigella , drugs, tumours, pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE). One of the most prominent causes today of haemolytic–uraemic 
syndrome is Escherichia coli O157:H7. 
Typically patients with haemoly tic–uraemic syndrome suffer from 
anaemia and thrombocytopenia, which causes abnormal bleeding. Seizures and coma also occur. Cases typically be gin with severe abdominal cramps and 
diarrhoea, which may become bloody by the second or third day. Nausea and 
vomiting are present in about half of th e patients. Most patients recover in 
seven to ten days, but some go on to develop the severe form of the disease. 
• Laboratory investigations 
haemoglobin blood film for malaria parasites total and differential white blood cell count sickle-cell screen urine for protein, glucose, blood MSU for pus cells, red cells, casts, crystals fresh stool: macroscopic appearance, red cells, pus cells, bacteria of 
characteristic shape and motility, 
cysts, trophozoites, larvae, ova endocervical swab (ECS) for pus cells, Gram-negative intracellular 
diplococci (GNID) 
blood for glucose pregnancy test VDRL. 
• Other investigations Aspiration of abdominal fluid, or fluid from the pouch of Douglas 
• Diagnostic imaging: acute abdominal pain X-ray of abdomen free air: erect and left lateral decubitus (perforation) fluid levels: supine, erect, left and right lateral decubitus (obstruction) 
renal stones: plain and intravenous pyelogram (IVP). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 171 
Chest X-ray 
for free air: upright (perforation). 
Ultrasound 
fluid in bowel, peristalsis (obstruction) enlarged sigmoid colon (sigmoid volvulus) bowel invagination (intussusception) intraperitoneal fluid (peritonitis) ectopic pregnancy, intra-abdominal abscess, hydrosalpinx and tubo-
ovarian abscess. 
• Diagnostic imaging: non-acute abdominal pain X-ray of abdomen cholecystogram barium swallow. 
Ultrasound of abdomen 
hepatosplenomegaly Echinococcus cyst 
pelvic masses, e.g. ovarian cyst, fibroid, ovarian carcinoma abdominal tumours, e.g. Burkitt lymphoma, Wilms tumour, other 
lymphomas, teratomas, etc. 
Guidelines for diagnostic imaging 
X-ray: acute abdomen 
Diagnostic imaging is helpful to plan correct surgical intervention and 
to avoid unnecessary and potentially dangerous surgical intervention. 
For suspected perforated gastric ulcer , an X-ray should be performed 
as soon as possible. The following views should be obtained: plain antero-
posterior (AP) with the patient lying dow n; lateral decubitus with the patient 
lying on the left side; and chest X-ray with the patient in the upright position 
to look for free air in the peritoneal cav ity. For the lateral decubitus view, the 
patient should be left in this position for a few minutes to allow the air to 
172 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 rise. The chest X-ray may be the best view for visualizing free air under the 
diaphragm. 
For suspected gastrointestinal obs truction, the following views should 
be obtained: plain AP with the patient supine and standing up; left and right 
decubitus; and a chest X-ray to look for fluid levels. It may be possible to determine the level of obstruction (jejunum, ileum, colon). Intestinal 
obstruction caused by a large bowel volvul us may be identified. Fluid levels 
at all levels of the bowel are seen in paralytic ileus. 
In some patients with abdominal obs truction, the patient may be given 
diluted water-soluble contrast medium to drink, and the passage of the contrast followed through the bowel for a few hours in order to localize the site of obstruction. In some cases, this procedure will resolve the obstruction. 
The patient must never receive barium suspension for examination. 
In a child with a suspected ileoc olic intussusception, radiological 
reposition may be performed, but this must be carried out only by an experienced radiologist. 
For suspected renal colic, a plain AP abdominal X-ray may show 
radiopaque stones. An intravenous pyelogram may also be made if well trained radiological staff are available and a physician is present during the injection of the contrast medium. The procedure can be limited to two to 
three images: one taken before the contr ast medium is injected and one taken 
15–20 minutes afterwards. Ultrasound is a preferable procedure for the demonstration of renal stones. 
Ultrasound: acute abdomen 
In case of gastrointestinal obstructi on, distended, mu ltiple fluid-filled 
loops of bowel are likely to be caused by either paralytic ileus or mechanical 
small bowel obstruction. Obstruction of the colon is likely to be due to 
sigmoid volvulus, which in some regions is endemic in adult males. Typically, abnormal thickening of the sigmoid wall and enlarged target configurations are seen. Increased or d ecreased peristalsis can also be noted. 
The characteristic appearance of intussusception is of a “doughnut” or 
“target”, with the image of two hypoechoic rings. 
Peritonitis appears as intra-abdominal fluid with different echoes, 
according to the consistency of the fluid (pus, blood, clots). 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 173 
Perforation of peptic ulcers and typhoid bowel show air in the 
abdominal cavity. 
Intra-abdominal abscesses (subphr enic abscess, abscesses between 
loops of bowel, pelvic abscess, perineph ric abscess) can be demonstrated as 
masses with or without a wall and vari ous echogenity within the respective 
area. The distinction between hydro salpinx and tubo-ovarian abscess and 
ectopic pregnancy is difficult. A tubo- ovarian abscess usually has a complex 
internal appearance with low-level echoes arising from the inflammatory 
fluid but ectopic pregnancy may mimic this appearance. 
Amoebic colitis, acute pancreatitis, appendicitis, acute pelvic 
inflammatory disease in women, ectopi c pregnancy, liver abscess: see under 
the respective sections. 
X-ray: non-acute abdominal pain 
A cholecystogram using fat-soluble contrast medium, given orally, can 
be performed by an experienced radiologist. A negative examination 
(“normal gallbladder”) does not rule out the presence of gallbladder disease; however the presence of stones gives a clear diagnosis. 
An intravenous cholangiogram examination should only be performed 
in hospitals with well trained radiologi cal and anaesthetic staff, due to the 
danger of severe adverse reactions from the contrast medium. 
Barium swallow using either a single contrast or double contrast 
technique for examining the stomach and the duodenum should be reserved 
for hospitals with qualified radiologists. 
Ultrasound: non-acute abdominal pain 
Echinococcus cysts of the liver show a typical appearance of multiple 
cysts with calcification, although this appearance does not exclude other 
cystic diseases such as liver abscess and amoebic abscesses. 
Ovarian cysts range from small cysts, e.g. corpus luteum cysts, to 
huge ovarian masses filling the whole pe lvis. The echoes seen in those cysts 
vary according to the internal fluid, e.g. blood, pus or clots. There may be involvement of other organs. Other pelvic masses may indicate ovarian carcinoma. 
174 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Most solid masses in the pelvis ari se from the uterus. Fibroids are the 
most common. They appear as single or multiple masses within the uterus, 
which can be considerably enlarged. La rger fibroids can be pedunculated and 
appear as extra-uterine masses. No n-calcified fibroids are hypoechoic 
relative to the surrounding myometrium; high echogenic areas result from calcification. A low-lying caecum fill ed with faeces can mimic a pelvic 
Abdominal masses in children include Burkitt lymphoma, other 
lymphoma, Wilms tumour and teratoma. Many Burkitt lymphomas occur in the abdomen, located around the kidney, ovary, liver or retroperitoneum. They are large tumours which do not appear to arise from a specific organ. Other lymphomas are often associated with mesenteric lymphadenopathy and present as rounded hypoechoic masses usually located near the midline at the root of the mesentery. Occasionally they develop septation, the so-called “sandwich” sign. Wilms tumour develops in children between 2 and 4 
years of age and grows as an intrarenal mass, poorly differentiated from the kidney. In 10% of cases, both kidneys are involved. Wilms tumours often grow into the inferior vena cava, whereas neuroblastomas displace the abdominal vessels. The appearance of teratomas is related to their 
composition, e.g. fat, hair, bone, teeth. 
For the appearance of tuberculous enteritis, see Section 5.7 on 
Children with “periodic syndrome” have pain for 1 day, are pale, 
vomit, have fever and normal stool examination. The major causes are non-specific colic or mesenteric adenitis usua lly associated with a viral infection. 
“Periodic syndrome” is a diagnosis of exclusion. 
5.13 Pregnancy 
The following information should be collected when examining a 
pregnant woman. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 175 
age date of last menstrual period bleeding time of menstruation pain (unilateral?) fever nausea and vomiting cramping previous abortions previous illnesses (e.g. diabetes, sexually transmitted infection) current illnesses trauma previous operations drugs attempt to induce abortion mental retardation in the family previous anomalous infant dyspnoea fetal movements seizures vaginal discharge twins in the family. 
• Physical examination assessment of pregnancy rapid pulse, raised temperature general appearance (additional illness, acu te and chronic, e.g. malaria, 
cardiac failure) 
shock abdominal tenderness oedema pallor of e.g. mucous membranes, nails vaginal examination (assessment of bleeding, size of uterus, 
assessment of cervical os) 
blood pressure. 
176 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Laboratory examinations 
haemoglobin urine for protein blood glucose pregnancy test cross-matching (if necessary). 
A pregnancy test is carried out on a sample of urine. Although a 
random urine sample can be used, an early morning urine sample is more 
sensitive. The test can become positive as early as a few days after the first 
missed period, but a negative test does not rule out early pregnancy. • Ultrasound 
Ultrasound examination in pregnancy is indicated when the 
observations of the midwife are not consistent with the history of the patient. 
Common indications for scanning during normal pregnancy are : 
estimation of gestational age (after first trimester) confirmation of the presence of a pregnancy and fetal viability multifetal pregnancy date/size discrepancy fetal position (see Section 5.13.5 on ultrasound in pregnancy). 
5.13.1 Diseases of pregnancy 
Pre-eclampsia/eclampsia 
Pre-eclampsia is a disease occurring after 20 weeks of gestation. The 
symptoms of pre-eclampsia are hypertension and proteinuria In mild pre-eclampsia elevated blood pressure is below 160/110 mmHg and proteinuria is 0.4 g to 5 g protein in urine per 24 hours. In severe pre-eclampsia blood pressure is above 160/110 mmHg on two occasions at least 6 hours apart, and urine protein is more than 5 g/24 hours. 
In eclampsia the typical signs of pre-eclampsia are combined with 
tonic–clonic grand mal seizures during or after delivery. The disease results from generalized constriction of the arterioles. The cause of the arteriolar constriction is unknown. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 177 
Maternal complications are seizures, cerebral haemorrhage, renal 
failure, thrombocytopenia, hepatic failure, pulmonary oedema, HELLP 
syndrome (haemolytic anaemia, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count). 
There is a risk of pre-term delivery and caesarean section. 
Fetal complications are acute and chronic placental insufficiency, 
placental infarction and abruption, intrapartal fetal distress, stillbirth, 
oligohydramnios and growth retardation 
Diseases of pregnancy include the following: 
• hyperemesis gravidarum 
• Rh incompatibility 
• pregnancy-induced hypertension 
• gestational diabetes. 
5.13.2 Diseases occurring during pregnancy 
The following diseases may cause compli cations to mother and child 
or both. Therefore, in pregnant women these diseases need special attention and treatment. • chronic renal disease 
• heart disease 
• respiratory diseases 
• endocrine diseases 
• diabetes, hypertension, coagulation disorders 
• drug misuse 
• syphilis 
• cytomegaly virus 
• toxoplasma 
• hepatitis B 
• listeria. 
Urinary tract infection occurs more frequently in pregnant women, 
whose muscles lining the ureters are more relaxed and because of the pressure of the uterus. Urinary tract infection may be asymptomatic in 
178 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 pregnant women. A midstream urine sample should be examined by 
microscopy to exclude an infection. 
Anaemia due to iron and folic acid deficiency is more common in 
pregnant and lactating women, who ha ve an increased demand for iron and 
folic acid for haemoglobin biosynthesis. Haemoglobin should be determined 
in all pregnant women as soon as possible and for some time after delivery. Women should receive iron and folic acid supplementation during pregnancy 
and lactation. 
5.13.3 Complicated pregnancy 
Complicated pregnancy is defined as any problem occurring during 
pregnancy. At the level of district hospitals in developing countries about 
60% of pregnancies are complicated. Complications in pregnancy can be separated into those which are most likel y to occur at any time in pregnancy, 
and those related to the different trim esters or delivery. The complications 
that may occur during pregnancy are listed in Table 5.21. 
Investigation of complicated pregnancy • History 
duration of pregnancy (date of last menstrual period) 
abdominal/pelvic pain: site, type vaginal bleeding/discharge: type, amount, clots, products of 
conception 
fetal movements attempts to induce abortion systemic illness: diabetes, renal di sease, heart disease, hypertension. 
past obstetrical history: pregnancy, abortion, complications, congenital 
abnormalities, multiple pregnancy, surgery 
family history of twins trauma shortness of breath 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 179 
Urinary tract infection 
Maternal disease: diabetes, hypertension, 
cardiac disease 
Infections 
Hepatitis B Herpes simplex C. trachomatis 
N. gonorrhoeae 
Laboratory investigations 
Gram stain HIV test 
Blood for parasites Delivery 
Pre-term labour 
Uterine rupture 
Cord prolapse Fetal distress Multiple pregnancy Malpresentations Cephalo-pelvic disproportion Fetal death Rhesus incompatibility 
Postmaturity
Laboratory investigations 
Blood for parasites Urine chemistry Blood glucose Blood typing 
Ultrasound
 Third trimester 
Pre-eclampsia/ eclampsia 
Ante-partum haemorrhage 
Hydramnios Oligohydramnios 
Cytomegalovirus 
Varicella zoster
Laboratory investigations 
Urine for protein Viral tests 
Ultrasound Second trimester 
Pre-eclampsia/eclampsia 
Small for date 
Large for date 
Laboratory investigations 
Blood for parasites Urine chemistry Blood glucose Blood typing 
Ultrasound
 Table 5.21 Complications in pregnancy 
First trimester 
Ectopic pregnancy 
Molar pregnancy Hyperemesis gravidarum 
Retention of urine 
Infections 
Toxoplasma gondii
Laboratory investigations 
Blood for parasites Urine chemistry MSU microscopy Pregnancy test Blood glucose Toxoplasma test 
Ultrasound
180 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
fever drug use symptoms of systemic infection. 
• Physical examination: general condition (acutely ill, in pain, clinical shock) increased temperature, rapid pulse, rapid respiratory rate, low blood 
pressure/high blood pressure 
dehydration pallor oedema abdominal/pelvic tenderness, localiz ed/generalized, guarding rebound 
tenderness 
palpable uterus, uterine size, uterine mass dehydration vagina/cervix on speculum examination
1: blood, products of 
conception 
pelvis on bimanual examination1: tenderness, tender pelvic mass, open 
cervical os 
signs of systemic infection. 
• Laboratory investigations haemoglobin blood film for malaria parasites total and differential white blood cell count, platelet estimate urine for glucose, protein MSU for pus cells, red cells, casts endocervical swab (ECS) for pus cells, Gram-negative intracellular 
diplococci (GNID) 
blood for glucose, urea/creatinine pregnancy test VDRL blood typing and cross-matching. 
1 This procedure should not be performed if there is suspected placental bleeding or threatened abortion. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 181 
• Diagnostic imaging 
ultrasound for: estimation of gestational age (date/size discrepancy) 
confirmation of pregnancy and fetal viability diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy evaluation of uterine bleeding (assessment of abortion) investigation of molar pregnancy multiple pregnancy placental disorders amniotic fluid fetal disorders malformations/malpresentations. 
Complications occurring at different stages of pregnancy are discussed 
in the following sections. First trimester (1–3 months) 
Abortion (85% of cases): mainly due to fe tal causes, e.g. inappropriate 
development of the fetus due to ch romosomal abnormalities, or maternal 
illness, e.g. malaria. Types of abortion 
• Threatened abortion : cervical os closed, uterus correct size for dates. 
• Inevitable abortion : rhythmical pains, dilatation of the cervix. 
• Incomplete abortion : partial expulsion of products of conception. 
Cervical os open, uterus small for dates. 
• Complete abortion : complete expulsion of a ll products of conception. 
Cervical os closed, non-pregnant uterus. 
• Missed abortion : death of fetus, complete retention of products of 
conception. 
• Recurrent abortion : more than three consecutive abortions. 
• Septic abortion : usually due to attempted criminal abortion. Patient is 
febrile and suffers from severe pelvic pain. 
• Ectopic pregnancy (implantation of the ovum outside the uterine 
cavity): e.g. inside the fallopian tube (95%), cervix, ovary, abdominal 
182 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 or pelvic cavity, due to tubal diseases such as sexually transmitted 
infections, use of intrauterine devices. 
• Molar pregnancy (tumour of the products of conception: 80% are 
benign; 15% are locally invasive; 5% are malignant). 
• Uterus too large for date . 
• Hyperemesis gravidarum : vomiting in pregnancy severe enough to 
cause profound metabolic changes. 
• Retention of urine : due to elongation of the urethra and compression 
by a retroverted uterus. 
• Infection : e.g. rubella virus, Toxoplasma gondii . 
Second trimester (4–6 months) • Abortion (15% of cases): mainly due to maternal causes, e.g. cervical 
incompetence, abnormalities of the ut erus (fibroids, septate/bicornuate 
uterus), diabetes mellitus, hypertension, chronic renal disease, infection (e.g. syphilis, malaria, Herpes simplex, Listeria 
monocytogenes ). 
• Pre-eclampsia/eclampsia : see Section 5.13.1 on diseases of 
pregnancy. 
Disorders of fetal growth 
Small for gestational age 
Definition: fetuses less than the 10t h percentile for growth are termed 
small for gestational age. 
a. Decreased growth potential 
• 10% to 15% due to congenital abnor malities (e.g. Down syndrome or 
any other trisomy, Turner syndrome, anencephaly, neural tube defects) 
• intrauterine infections of various origins, e.g. cytomegaly, rubella) 
• exposure to teratogens (e.g. alcohol, cigarettes) 
• small maternal stature 
• pregnancies at high altitudes 
• female fetus. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 183 
b. Intrauterine growth restriction 
• decreased nutrition and oxygen transmitted across the placenta 
• maternal causes: hypertension, rena l failure, anaemia, malnutrition 
• placental causes: placenta praevia, placental infarction. 
c. Additional causes of small babies according to the gestational age 
• multiple gestations, oligohydramnios. 
Large for gestational age 
Definition: estimated fetal weight higher than the 90th percentile 
(birth weight more than 4500 g) is termed large for gestational age. 
Causes include: diabetes mellitus. maternal obesity, multiparity, 
advanced maternal age, large maternal stature, male fetus. Third trimester (7–9 months) Pre-eclampsia/eclampsia 
See section 5.13.1 on diseases of pregnancy. 
Ante partum haemorrhage 
• Definition: any vaginal blee ding in late pregnancy. 
• Bleeding is the main complication of the third trimester; it often leads to pre-term labour and delivery. 
• Clinical feature: vaginal bleeding, tenderness of the abdomen or back pain, abnormal contractions, fetal di stress, shock, pre-term labour, pre-
term rupture of the membranes, intrauterine growth restriction, malpresentation, congenital disorders. 
a. Placental (50%) 
• Placenta praevia (low-lying placenta which covers the internal 
cervical os; complete means total covering, marginal means the edge 
of the placenta reaches the margin of the os). 
184 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Placenta praevia is occasionally combined with placenta accreta 
(abnormal adherence), placenta increta (invading the myometrium) and placenta percreta (invades the uterine membranes). Mothers with a history of smoking, previous caesarean section, multiparty, multiple gestation, increased maternal age and erythroblastosis, are at high risk of developing placenta praevia. Bleeding results from small disruptions in the placental attachment during the normal development and thinning of the lower uterine segment during the third trimester. Placenta praevia should never be assessed by vaginal examination. This must be avoided. 
• Placental abruption (separation of the placenta from the uterine wall). 
About 30% of haemorrhage in the third trimester is due to placental abruption. The main risk for pl acental abruption is hypertension, 
trauma, short umbilical cord, hydramnios, old maternal age, drug misuse, pre-term rupture of me mbranes. Haemorrhage appears 
revealed, concealed or external. The uterus is tender, painful 
contractions can be reported. 
b. Maternal 
• Uterine rupture due to uterine scares, abdominal trauma, abnormal 
placentation, overdistension, multiparty, large fetus, abnormal position of the fetus. 
• Clinical features: sudden onset, shock, fetal distress or disappearance of fetal heart beat, pain, vaginal bleeding. 
• Fetal vessel rupture mainly due to velamentous cord insertion (cord 
between amnion and chorion, unprotected from the membranes). 
• Causes: mainly multiple pregnancies. d. Non-obstetric causes 
• Cervicitis. 
• Benign or malign neoplasm. 
• Laceration of the vagina. 
• Varices. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 185 
• Pelvic trauma. 
• Clotting disorders. 
• Polyhydramnios: due to maternal causes (diabetes mellitus, benign 
placental tumours) and fetal causes (multiple pregnancy, anencephaly, 
oesophageal/duodenal atresia, absence of kidneys, hydrops foetalis) 
• Oligohydramnios: due to poor pl acental function, fetal growth 
retardation, renal agenesis. 
• Malpresentation: breech, transverse position—may be due to fetal congenital abnormality. 
• High head near term: poor position of the fetus, angle of the pelvic brim, pelvic tumours, pelvic disproportion, hydramnios, placenta praevia. 
• Cephalopelvic disproportion: contracted pelvis, large fetal head, diabetes. 
• Fetal death causes: diabetes, Herpes simplex , malaria, hypertension, 
chronic renal disease. 
• Infection, e.g. cytomegalovirus, Varicella zoster . 
• Rhesus incompatibility. 
• Postmaturity. 
Disorders of amniotic fluid 
The normal amount of amniotic flui d is 800 mL at about 28 weeks and 
500 mL at 40 weeks. 
Oligohydramnios 
• Definition: lack of amniotic fluid. 
• Clinical feature: uterus small for date, uterus feels full of fetus, labour often preterm. 
• Causes: decreased secretion by the fetal kidneys or increased resorption by the placenta, swallowed “b y the fetus, or leaked out into 
the vagina, due to fetal congenita l abnormalities, decreased placental 
perfusion or ruptured membranes. 
Polyhydramnios • Definition: excess of amniotic fluid. 
186 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • Clinical features: increased symphysiofundal height, tense uterus, 
bigger than date. Difficulty to feel any fetal parts. 
• Causes: diabetes mellitus of the mother, multiple gestations, hydrops (Rh incompatibility, congenital abnormalities) 
Multiple gestations 
Definition of multiple gestations 
• Monocygote: a fertilized ovum divides into two separate ova. 
• Dicygote: an ovulation produced two ova and both are fertilized. 
• Triplet pregnancy (rare). 
Clinical features 
In multiple pregnancies complicati ons including pre-term labour, cord 
prolapse, pre-eclampsia, congenital abnormalities, malpresentation and 
twin–twin transfusion syndrome are more frequent. The patient should be referred to a hospital with an obstetric facility to avoid complications during 
delivery. Normally a multiple gesta tion is suspected when a date-size 
discrepancy of the uterus has been di agnosed. Very often the medical history 
of the pregnant woman reveals a history of twins in the family. 
5.13.4 Complications during labour and delivery 
Pre-term labour 
Definition: labour before 37 weeks of gestation with change of the 
cervix. Reasons include: 
• maternal infections (e.g. syphilis, malaria) 
• uterine rupture 
• fetal distress : due to placental insufficienc y, abruptio placentae, cord 
prolapse, maternal cardiac disease, fetal abnormalities 
• fetal infections: e.g. hepatitis B, malaria, Herpes simplex, HIV , 
neonatal conjunctivitis ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae , Chlamydia 
trachomatis ), neonatal pneumonia ( C. trachomatis ) 
• premature spontaneous rupture of the membranes Definition: rupture of the membranes before onset of labour 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 187 
 Clinical feature: Leaking of vaginal fluid, pain 
• Chorio-amnionitis 
 Definition: infection of the amniotic fluid. Clinical feature: Maternal fever, fetal tachycardia, uterine 
tenderness, smelling vaginal discharge. 
• Fetal death Definition: lack of fetal heart rate at or beyond 20 weeks of 
 Causes: all complications mentioned above (in addition: cord 
compression, utero-placental insufficiency). 
• Other causes of pre-term labour: multiple pregnancy polyhydramnios ante partum haemorrhage uterine abnormalities. 
Obstruction, malpositions and malpresentations 
a. Cephalopelvic dysproportion 
• Definition: absolute: no possibility for vaginal delivery 
• Relative: large baby, able to pass in case of normal labour. 
• Clinical feature: high head at term, obstruction of labour. 
• Causes: pelvis of the mother too small, polyhydramnios, multiple pregnancy, fetal abnormalit ies (e.g. hydrocephalus). 
b. Breech presentation • Clinical feature: head can be felt in the fundus (Leopold manoeuvres). Fetal heart near the fundus, breech can be palpated in the pelvis or by 
vaginal examination. 
c. Cord prolapse • Clinical feature: cord can be fe lt ahead of the presenting part. Often 
combined with malpresentations, pr e-term delivery, multiparity, small 
188 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 d. Other malpresentations 
• Shoulder-presentation, brow-presentation, face presentation and occipito-posterior presentation are rare. 
5.13.5 Ultrasound investigations during pregnancy and delivery 
Ultrasound examinations are made when pathological features are 
expected, or when the findings of the midwives are not consistent with the history of the patient. Often the susp ected diagnosis is confirmed during 
scanning. The person making the examination should not tell the pregnant women the diagnosis during the investigation, not only in severe findings such as fetal death or ectopic pregnancy but also confirming a twin pregnancy or an intact pregnancy. Th e observations and their consequences 
should be rather discussed with the patient after the examination in appropriate surroundings. It may be even advisable to tell the findings to a nurse or midwife who comes from the same community as the patient and therefore may be more qualified to discuss the problems the patient may have to face. 
Estimation of gestational age 
Uncertainty about gestational age occurs when patients cannot 
accurately remember the date of th e last menstrual period, or when 
menstruation had not resumed due to br east feeding. From 7 weeks on, fetal 
heart movements are visible in abdominal scanning. From 8–12 weeks, an 
estimation of fetal length can be ma de (crown–rump length). During the 
second and third trimesters, biparietal di ameter and femur length are used to 
demonstrate fetal growth. Abdominal circumference can also be measured 
but is less accurate. Tables for fetal age assessment are usually provided within the operating manual of the scanner. 
In case of decreased fetal growth, both parameters are less than the 
10th percentile according to the tables. The abdominal circumference can be assessed as a third parameter, although it is less accurate. 
When all parameters, such as biparietal diameter, femur length and 
abdominal circumference, are 10 to 15% higher than expected, they indicate that a fetus is too large for its gestational age. 
Examination of clinical symptoms and signs 189 
Confirmation of pregnancy and fetal viability 
Assessment of fetal viability in cludes presence of fetal heart 
movements (from 7 weeks on in abdominal scanning). 
Signs of fetal death include lack of fetal heartbeat, oligohydramnios 
(scanty amniotic fluid), hydrops foetalis (generalized oedema of the fetus), 
overlapping of the cranial sutures. 
Ectopic pregnancy 
Any pelvic mass in a woman of child bearing age should be considered 
an ectopic pregnancy until proved otherwise. An unruptured ectopic 
pregnancy appears as a complex mass between 1.5–2.5 cm consisting of an 
echoic centre and an echogenic ring. With a ruptured ectopic pregnancy there is intraperitoneal fluid. The blood is anechoic when unclotted, but moderately echogenic when clotted. There is also blood in the pouch of Douglas. If the ultrasound investigation is difficult, it should be repeated several times and confirmed by a second investigator. Ectopic pregnancy can mimic a complex adnexal mass, especially the “chronic ectopic pregnancy” in combination with sexually transmitted infection where the typical signs of acute abdomen are missing. Severe anaemia is often present, and a pregnancy test can be helpful. 
Assessment of abortion 
Incomplete abortion shows lack of a definable embryo. Missed 
abortion shows retention of products of conception with a non-viable fetus. 
Molar pregnancy 
Molar pregnancy shows a typical pattern of multiple small 
anechogenic structures within the echogenic tissue. Uterine disorders 
Uterine fibroids appear as hypoechoic masses inside the uterus, or 
may be pedunculated, in addition to an existing pregnancy. Calcified fibroids 
are hyperechoic. A bicornuate uterus shows a normal pregnancy in one horn, 
with a thickened endometrium in the other horn. 
190 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Placental disorders 
Placental abnormalities are well dem onstrated by ultrasound. In 
suspected fetal growth retardation, the following may be demonstrated: 
abnormally small placenta, areas of thrombosis and placental infarction 
reflecting premature senescence. 
Ultrasound can identify placenta praevia with 95% accuracy. Placing 
the patient in the Trendelenburg position may assist in obtaining a precise picture. Abruption of the placenta can only be demonstrated by the presence of a retroplacental clot, in rare cases. 
Amniotic disorders 
The amniotic fluid index (AFI) is calculated by dividing the maternal 
abdomen into quadrants, finding the larg est vertical pocket in each quadrant, 
and adding the vertical measures of each pocket. An AFI of less than 5 is 
considered oligohydramnios. An AFI of greater than 20 indicates polyhydramnios. 
Fetal disorders 
Fetal abnormalities can be clinically suspected when there is evidence 
of oligohydramnios or hydramnios. However, not all anatomical 
abnormalities of the fetus can be detected by ultrasound. 
Multifetal pregnancy 
Sonographically it is important to be aware of two types of twin-
pregnancy. The dizygotic type has two amniotic cavities and two placentas. 
In the monozygotic type the twins have only one amniotic sac. Complications are more frequent in th e monozygotic type. Cord torsions are 
most frequently observed in this type. 
Chorio-amnionitis 
Elevated fetal heart rate. Organisms changing the amniotic fluid can 
be depicted as irregular echoes. 
An endemic disease is a disease which is usually present in a 
community at all times but with relatively low incidence. Something that is 
endemic is typically restricted or peculiar to a locality or region. An epidemic disease is a disease which occurs in more than usual numbers in a 
community. Therefore, an epidemic is usually recognized by an increase in 
the numbers of cases of a disease. Even a single case of a disease may constitute an epidemic if the disease is not normally present in the community, e.g. Ebola haemorrhagic fe ver, plague. Most diseases that cause 
epidemics are highly infectious. Most endemic diseases are only moderately or not very infectious. An increase in the number of cases of a disease may occur without an epidemic. A pandemic occurs when an epidemic becomes 
very widespread and affects a whole regi on, a continent, or the entire world. 
Outpatient morbidity data most cl osely resemble diseases present in 
the community. Therefore figures for disease prevalence (the number of cases over a period of time, e.g. a month or a year, in a particular location) can be examined to know if there is an increase in numbers of cases of a disease. This is usually done by collecting numbers of cases (disease statistics) in routine health facility wo rk. For example, patients attending an 
outpatient clinic are (or should be) recorded daily in a register. 
An epidemic always starts with a disease in a few individuals. It is the 
responsibility of the clinician to take an epidemic into consideration when 
establishing the diagnosis of a disease in a patient. It is also his or her responsibility to alert the health services if a suspected risk for an epidemic 
192 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 presents and take preventive measures as appropriate to avoid the risk of 
spreading the disease within the local population and extending the disease 
outside the local area. 
The risk of an epidemic due to an infectious agent depends on: 
• the means of transmitting the agent. Means of transmitting infectious 
diseases include: droplet infection, direct contact (including sexual 
transmission, animal bites, etc), ingestion of contaminated food and water, and through vectors, e.g. mosquito bites. 
• the immunization/immune status of the population. Diseases in which 
there is a high degree of natural immunity in certain populations include hepatitis A and Epstein–Barr virus. Diseases for which effective immunization is available include: poliomyelitis, measles, diphtheria ( Corynebacterium diphtheriae ), tetanus, yellow fever, 
hepatitis B, rubella, meningococcal in fection types A, C, Y and W 135 
(Neisseria meningitidis ), rabies, influenza. 
A decision to act rapidly to manage an epidemic therefore depends on: 
• the severity of the disease 
• the risk of spread of the disease within the local population 
• the number of cases expected to occur 
• the risk of social and economic disruption 
• the danger of regional, national and international transmission. 
Confirming the nature of the disease is done through detailed 
examination of the affected individuals, following the standard procedures: • history-taking (symptoms of disease) 
• physical examination (signs of disease). Laboratory examination consists of tests that can be done onsite, and 
tests that are referred to higher cen tres (for which specimens are taken 
onsite). Table 6.1 list major presenting features of epidemic conditions. 
Epidemics 193 
Table 6.1 Major clinical presenting features of epidemic conditions 
Major presenting 
feature Major causes of epidemics 
Fever Typhoid ( Salmonella typhi, Salmonella paratyphi ) 
Brucellosis ( Brucella abortus, Brucella suis, Brucella melitensis ) 
Malaria ( Plasmodium spp.) 
Dengue fever 
Yellow fever Relapsing fever ( Borrelia recurrentis ) 
Leptospirosis ( Leptospira spp.) 
Rift Valley fever 
Fever with rash Measles 
Rubella Varicella 
Typhus ( Rickettsia sp ) 
Localized skin 
rash Anthrax ( Bacillus anthracis ) 
Guinea worm ( Dracunculus medinensis ) 
Fever and haemorrhage Dengue fever 
Yellow fever 
Ebola and Marburg virus diseases Endemic haemorrhagic fever viruses (e.g. Crimean–Congo, West Nile etc.) 
lymphadenopathy Filariasis ( Wuchereria bancrofti ) 
Visceral leishmaniasis ( Leishmania donovani ) 
Plague ( Yersinia pestis ) 
Trypanosomiasis ( Trypanosoma spp.) 
Fever and neurological disease Meningitis ( Neisseria meningitidis , Haemophilus influenzae , 
Cryptococcus neoformans ) 
Viral encephalitis Rabies 
Poliomyelitis 
respiratory tract 
disease Diphtheria ( Corynebacterium diphtheriae ) 
Whooping cough ( Bordetella pertussis ) 
Anthrax ( Bacillus anthracis ) 
Pneumonic plague ( Yersinia pestis ) 
Legionellosis 
Pneumonia ( Streptococcus pneumoniae ) 
Tuberculosis ( M. tuberculosis ) 
Viral laryngo-tracheobronchitis 
Viral influenza 
194 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Table 6.1 Major clinical presenting features of epidemic conditions 
(concluded) 
Major presenting 
feature Major causes of epidemics 
Gastrointestinal 
disease with or 
without fever (watery diarrhoea, 
dysentery) 
 Vibrio cholera 
Shigella spp.) 
Salmonella spp. 
Campylobacter enteritis 
Escherichia coli enteritis Entamoeba histolytica 
Viral enteritis due to rotavirus 
Clostridium perfringens 
Fever and jaundice Hepatitis A 
Hepatitis B 
Hepatitis E Leptospira spp. 
Plasmodium spp. 
Yellow fever 
Borrelia recurrentis 
6.1 The role of the laboratory in the investigation of 
6.1.1 Tests to be done on-site 
The testing that can be carried out on-site depends on the availability 
of equipment, reagents and qualified staff. Simple tests may provide definitive diagnosis of parasitic in fections, but provide only presumptive 
diagnosis of viral and bacterial infectio ns. Certain rapid tests can also verify 
the diagnosis of viral inf ections (e.g. HIV , HBV). The following tests may be 
performed: • field stained thick and thin films of blood, chancre fluid, lymph gland fluid, splendid aspirate material for parasites: malaria, Borrelia spp., 
leishmania organisms, trypanosomes 
• wet preparations of stool for: cholera ( Vibrio cholerae ), pus cells, red 
blood cells, Campylobacter spp., trophozoites of Entamoeba 
histolytica/dispar . 
Other tests that may assist with the diagnosis are: 
Epidemics 195 
• haemoglobin estimation 
• total and differential white blood cell count 
• Ziehl–Neelsen stain 
• blood glucose using reagent strips 
• chemical testing of urine using reagent strips. 
6.1.2 Initial tests to be done at the laboratory base 
This requires either the transfer of the patient (in case of suspected 
meningitis) or transfer of specimens to the laboratory base. Cerebrospinal fluid must be collected using a strict aseptic technique. 
The following preliminary tests are performed: 
• total cell counts 
• chemical analysis: glucose and protein 
• microscopy of the spun deposit for: − Gram stain (GNID suggestive of Neisseria meningitidis , Gram-
negative rods suggestive of Haemophilus influenzae , Gram-
positive cocci suggestive of Streptococcus pneumoniae ). 
− Field stain: differential white cell count, Borrelia spp. 
− Ziehl–Neelsen stain: for Mycobacteria spp. 
− India ink: for Cryptococcus neoformans. 
Specimen transfer for the following tests: 
• total and differential white blood cell count 
• blood concentration technique for trypanosomes 
• blood films for further examination. 
• stool for further examination. Specimens are transported to the laboratory base as follows: 
• blood films: slides cleaned of oil, wrapped in tissue paper. 
• whole blood: anticoagulated using EDTA, in leak-proof containers, in a coolbox. 
• stool: clean, wide-mouthed, leak-proof containers. 
196 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 6.1.3 Tests to be referred to the central laboratory 
• Swabs for culture: in appropriate tran sport media, e.g. rectal swabs for 
Vibrio cholerae in alkaline peptone water; rectal swabs for other 
enteric pathogens in Cary–Blair transport medium. 
• Stool for culture, e.g. for Shigella , Salmonella . 
• Serum for serological tests, e.g. haemorrhagic fevers, yellow fever: 
0.5–1 ml in a clean, dry leak-proof tube. 
• Cerebrospinal fluid for Neisseria meningitidis : 2–5 mL (1–2 mL in 
children) in a sterile bottle. 
• Blood for culture: blood collected aseptically and inoculated into blood culture media, e.g. for typhoid ( Salmonella typhi ). 
• Water for bacteriological analysis for faecal coliforms, Vibrio 
cholerae , etc: 0.5–1 L water collected in a clean, leak-proof sterile 
container. 
• Post mortem samples, e.g. rectal swabs, autopsy specimens. 
Noncommunicable diseases 
The major noncommunicable disease complexes that are increasingly 
affecting populations of developing countries and that are important in 
public health care are: 
• cardiovascular disease 
• diabetes mellitus 
• hypertension 
• diseases of the thyroid 
• malignancies. Biochemical, genetic, nutritional and behavioural factors contribute to 
the development of these diseases. Whereas the majority of infectious 
diseases show clinical manifestation w ithin hours, days, weeks or months, 
with some exceptions the clinical symptoms of noncommunicable diseases 
develop slowly over years or decades. Moreover, in the early stage of a noncommunicable disease the clinical symptoms may be subtle and are 
therefore often overlooked by the physician. 
It is important to diagnose risk factors and advise individuals at risk 
on appropriate measures (e.g. changes in nutritional habits and behaviour) to 
prevent the clinical manifestation of noncommunicable disease. 
7.1 Cardiovascular disease 
The risk factors for cardiovascular disease are: 
198 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • obesity (see body–mass index in the glossary) 
• lack of physical exercise 
• hypertension 
• diabetes mellitus 
• hyperlipoproteinaemia. 
The risk factors are diagnosed by the medical history, physical 
examination, including the measurement of blood pressure, and laboratory investigations as appropriate. Laborator y indicators may be abnormal in a 
subject at risk although the disease may not yet be clinically apparent. In 
patients with manifest cardiovascular disease additionally ECG and X-ray examinations may show abnormalities. Cardiovascular disease may also 
develop as chronic disease after streptococcal, Treponema pallidum or 
trypanosomal infection. 
Large and longitudinal epidemiological studies revealed a close 
relationship between hyperlipoproteina emia, in particular hypercholesterol-
aemia, and cardiovascular disease. This is why today serum lipids and serum apolipopproteins are measured as part of the risk assessment for cardiovascular disease. 
7.1.1 Laboratory indicators 
• Total serum cholesterol. 
• Serum triglycerides. 
• LDL cholesterol. 
• Apolipoprotein A1 and apolipoprotein B. 
Apolipoproteins A1 and B correlate better with the degree of coronary 
heart disease than low de nsity lipoprotein cholesterol. The concept of 
apolipoproteins is appreciated, but dete rmination of these proteins is not 
frequently requested by physicians. 
The main complications of cardiovascular disease are coronary heart 
disease, which may be complicated by myocardial infarction, stroke and also atheromatous peripheral vascular disease. 
The most commonly available tests to assess cardiac injury include 
creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and myoglobin. 
Noncommunicable diseases 199 
 Diagnostic imaging 
Imaging procedures may be useful and medically indicated in order 
primarily to evaluate the extent of cardiovascular disease, to plan medical or 
surgical intervention and to follow up on treatment. 
At peripheral level chest radiographs (PA and lateral) give extensive 
diagnostic information on size and shap e of the heart and on vascularization 
of the lungs. Thus, early stages of pul monary congestion may be diagnosed 
radiologically before clinical symptoms arise. More sophisticated imaging procedures such as angiography or ultrasound of the heart (echocardiography) are normally applie d in large referral hospitals only. 
7.2 Diabetes mellitus 
Diabetes mellitus is a clinical syndrom e that is typically characterized 
by impaired glucose metabolism. However, the protein, fat and purine metabolisms are also affected. The cau se of the metabolic disorder is an 
imbalance between the action of insulin and insulin-counteracting hormones (steroids, glucagon, parathyroid ho rmone, thyroid hormone, etc.). Long 
standing metabolic imbalance leads to clinical complications of diabetes. 
Two major clinical forms of di abetes mellitus are distinguished: 
• juvenile diabetes (type 1), mainly caused by insulin insufficiency 
• adult-onset diabetes (type 2), mainly caused by insufficient response of tissue to insulin stimulation of the cell metabolism. Diabetic mothers have increased risk of birth defects (15%–20%) 
compared with the general population (3%–5%). Therefore mother and child health care programmes play a major role in detecting and following up diabetes mellitus during pregnancy. The t ypical features of juvenile and adult 
onset diabetes mellitus are listed in Table 7.1 
Acute clinical symptoms of diabetes mellitus result from acute 
alterations of glucose and insulin metabolism. They may be life-threatening when the patient is in a diabetic hyperosmolar, ketoacidotic or hypoglycaemic coma (see Section 5.10.3 on coma). 
Clinical symptoms from chronic disease result from altered organ and 
tissue functions that are caused by impaired glucose metabolism over long 
200 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 periods. The symptoms and laboratory indicators of clinically manifest 
diabetes mellitus are listen in Table 7.2. 
7.2.1 Laboratory indicators 
Blood, plasma or serum glucose. Glucose 24 hour-profile. Glucose tolerance test. Urine glucose. Microalbumin in urine. Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) or fructosamine. 
Special laboratory indicators 
insulin, pro-insulin, C-peptide insulin antibodies. 
The laboratory diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is conveniently made 
from fasting or postprandial hyperglycaemia in a patient. Elevated urinary 
glucose may be found in diabetic patie nts without renal insufficiency whose 
blood glucose levels are above 180 mg/dL (165 mmol/L). However, in patients with renal insufficiency, urin ary glucose may be observed even at 
normal blood glucose levels. 
Table 7.1 Features of juvenile and adult-onset diabetes mellitus 
 Juvenile Adult-onset 
Age of onset < 25 years > 40 years 
Body weight slim overweight 
Vascular symptoms microangiopathy atherosclerosis Genetic burden low high Insulin metabolism lack of in sulin inappropriate insulin 
Noncommunicable diseases 201 
 Table 7.2 Clinical symptoms and laboratory indicators of diabetes 
Clinical symptom Laboratory indicator 
Weight loss 
Polyuria Glycosaemia 
Glucosuria 
Glucose intolerance HbA1c, fructosamine 
Ketoacidosis Vomiting 
 Signs of acute abdomen Anorexia 
Coma Urine ketone bodies 
Ketone breathing 
Frequent infections and 
inflammations Cystitis 
Pyelonephritis 
Gingivitis 
Abscesses Bacteriuria 
Microangiopathy Retinopathy (loss of vision)
Renal insufficiency 
Microalbuminuria, proteinuria Haematuria 
Serum creatinine 
Polyneuropathy (loss of 
sensibility) 
Sexual impotence 
Diarrhoea and constipation Hypertension Macroangiopathy Cardiovascular disease 
Urinary glucose determination is a simple, but not an optimal method 
to control therapy. Urine glucose dete rmination should only be made if no 
other tests are available. More accurate tests for control and prognosis of diabetes mellitus include the following. 
202 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Glycated haemoglobin and fructosamine 
Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) is a retrospective indicator for blood 
glucose levels over a longer period (8–10 weeks). HbA1c gives a better 
index than sporadic blood glucose estim ations in the control of diabetes 
mellitus. Clinical laboratories measure glycated haemoglobin using different assays. Clinicians should be familiar with the assay used in their own 
laboratory, and laboratories should alwa ys use the same assay to ensure 
comparability of results in the control of individual diabetic patients. 
The fructosamine assay measures glycated serum albumin. However, 
glycated albumin has a shorter biological life time (about 60 days) than HbA1c (about 120 days). From a clinical point of view both indicators seem to be equally valid. 
Microalbuminuria 
Microalbuminuria is a good index of urinary albumin excretion in 
minute amounts and is used to detect early diabetic nephropathy especially 
in type 1 diabetes. Simple test procedures for the detection of microalbuminuria are available. 
The special tests used for the differential diagnosis of diabetes are 
normally reserved for central laborator ies. The discussion of the use of these 
tests is beyond the scope of this document. 
7.2.2 Diagnostic imaging 
Imaging procedures may be indicated to further evaluate organ 
complications of diabetes mellitus, be it cardiac, vascular, renal, or other organ manifestations. For the heart, plain radiography (PA and lateral views) is normally sufficient. Kidneys are best examined by ultrasound, whereas 
vascular complications may need angi ography eventually, in addition to 
Doppler examinations. 
7.3 Hypertension 
Individuals with elevated blood pressure suffer from hypertension. 
Patients with hypertension may suffer from retinopathy, kidney failure, early 
Noncommunicable diseases 203 
 development of congestive heart failure and/or cerebrovascular disease. 
Surveys have identified socioeconomic status, body weight, age, nutrition, 
organ damage (kidney), hormone and me tabolic disorders as causal factors 
for the development of hypertension. Epidemiological studies showed that populations of African origin are more prone to develop hypertension than Caucasian populations who live in the sa me environment. Moreover a family 
history of elevated blood pressure is one of the strongest risk factors for future development of hypertension in individuals.). 
No specific cause can be identified in more than 95% of patients with 
hypertension. These patients are diagnosed as suffering from primary hypertension. The small minority of patients in whom a specific cause has been identified are diagnosed as having secondary hypertension. Selected causes of secondary hypertension are listed in Table 7.4. 
Table 7.4 Selected causes of secondary hypertension 
Renal disorders 
Pregnancy induced 
Surgically induced Coarctation of aorta Exogenous substance or medicine Hormonal contraceptives 
Corticosteroids 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
Sympaticomimetics 
Lead Endocrine disorders Hypothyroidism 
Hyperthyroidism 
Adrenal disease (phaeochromcytoma) Hypophysis tumour 
Carcinoid tumour 
Neurological disorders Brain tumour 
Encephalitis 
204 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 7.3.1 Clinical assessment of patients with hypertension 
The diagnostic investigation of a subject with hypertension has several 
goals: • confirm a chronic elevation of blood pressure 
• assess the overall cardiovascular risk 
• evaluate existing organ dama ge or concomitant disease 
• search for possible causes. A superficial investigation is unacceptable since hypertension is a life-
long disease, and therapy may have se rious implications on the patient. 
Medical history of the patient provides important information (lifestyle, hereditary risk, nutritional habits, etc). Accurate physical examination is not 
limited to measurement of blood pressure but should concentrate on finding possible signs suggesting secondary hypertension. A single measurement of blood pressure is often not sufficient . Measurement should be repeated over 
a period of several days and at differ ent times during the day. Blood pressure 
can be optimally assessed by continuous measurement during a period of 24 
7.3.2 Laboratory investigations 
The minimum laboratory investigatio n needed is a matter of debate. 
However investigations should progress from the most simple to the more complicated tests. The tests listed in Table 7.5 may be considered. 
Table 7.5 Laboratory investigations for hypertensive patients 
Strongly recommended tests Urine analysis (dipstick) 
Serum creatinine 
Blood glucose Serum cholesterol 
Plasma potassium 
Additional tests Plasma uric acid 
Haemoglobin and haematocrit Urine culture 
Noncommunicable diseases 205 
 7.3.3 Diagnostic imaging 
As part of an initial evaluation of arterial hypertension, chest 
radiographs should be made under standa rd conditions (PA and lateral view, 
erect patient, minimum distance betw een X-ray tube and patient 140 cm). 
The main reason is to establish a baselin e with regard to shape and size of 
the heart and the pulmonary vasculari zation. In the absence of organ 
complications already caused by hypertension, no further diagnostic imaging procedures are needed. 
Further imaging examinations such as echocardiography, examination 
of the kidneys, and/or renal arteries (Doppler and/or angiography) would depend upon the clinical situation. 
See also Section 7.1.1 on cardiovascular disease. 
7.4 Diseases of the thyroid 
Diseases of the thyroid gland are among the most abundant endocrine 
disorders worldwide, second to diab etes. Thyroid disease may result from 
excessive thyroid hormone activity (hyperthyroidism) or from insufficient hormone activity (hypothyroidism). Hyper- and hypothyroidism may be due to diseases of the thyroid gland, ma lfunction of the pituitary gland or 
malfunction in the hypothalamus. Goitre or active thyroid nodules may be endemic in some areas due to dietary deficiency of iodine, which must be available for the biosynthesis of thyroid hormone. Patients with goitre may not show clinical signs of hyper- or hypothyroidism. The thyroid gland may also be the site of inflammatory disease (thyroiditis) and of various types of tumours (adenoma). 
Thyroid diseases can be serious and even life-threatening but are 
usually curable. The typical symptoms are the listed in Table y.6. 
Common forms of hyperthyroidism are: 
• immunogenic diffuse hyperthyroidism enlarged, soft thyroid (Basedow or Graves disease) 
• thyroid storm thyroid nodules (not obligatory) 
• multifocal goitre multifocal nodules 
• thyroid carcinoma (papillary, folicular, solid) nodules 
206 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 • subacute thyroiditis de 
Quervain asymmetrically enlarged, hard thyroid gland 
• iatrogenic hyperthyroidism normal thyroid gland. Rarely, other diseases may produce symptoms of hyperthyroidism due 
to thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH production). 
Common forms of hypothyroidism are: 
• iodine deficiency (endemic cretinism) very enlarged thyroid gland 
• primary hypothyroidism (myxoedema) no or dislocated thyroid gland 
• autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis) enlarged painless thyroid gland 
• iatrogenic hypothyroidism normal thyroid gland. 
7.4.1 Laboratory indicators Unspecific laboratory indicators for thyroid disease are elevated white 
blood cell count and elevated blood sed imentation rate (BSR) indicating an 
inflammatory process (thyroiditis). Se rum creatine kinase (CK) activity may 
be highly elevated in hyperthyroidism. 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is the primary indicator for the 
laboratory diagnosis of hyper- and hypothyroidism. Low TSH levels the 
blood of a patient with clinical symptoms confirm the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. Conversely, high levels of TSH are confirmatory for hypothyroidism in a patient with clini cal symptoms of suppressed thyroid 
function. A differential diagnosis of different forms of hyper-or hypothyroidism requires the measurement of free T4 (FT4) and free T3 (FT3) [6]. In autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto; de Quervain) thyroid auto-
antibodies are elevated. Typically, in de Quervain thyroiditis giant cells are detected by histological examination in a thyroid gland aspiration, which are absent in Hashimoto thyroiditis. 
Noncommunicable diseases 207 
 Table 7.6 Clinical signs of hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism 
Hyperthyroidism Hypothyroidism 
 Cretinism (neonatal) 
 Growth retardation (during adolescence) 
 Retarded tooth development 
Tremor Change in behaviour, loss of intelligence Hyperreactivity Hyporeactivity 
Heat intolerance 
Fever Hypothermia Moist skin Dry skin 
Diarrhoea Constipation 
Hypocapnia Hypercapnia Fatigue and weakness 
Hypomenorrhoea Menorrhagia 
Increasing appetite Weight loss 
Tachycardia Bradycardia 
Ophthalmopathia: la crimation, light 
sensitivity, orbital oedema Reflexes: fast contraction, but slow 
relaxation 
Pretibial myxoedema 
Goitre Goitre Fever 
Psychosis Psychosis Coma Coma 
208 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 Severe maternal hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency or thyroid 
blocking agents may lead to cretinism in newborns if untreated. It is of vital 
importance that this condition is recognized. In many countries screening of 
newborns by measuring thyroid stimul ating hormone (TSH) has therefore 
become mandatory. Sampling should be performed during the first–second or fifth–seventh day after birth. 
7.4.2 Diagnostic imaging 
Two complementary methods are recommended. Imaging of the 
thyroid is sufficiently done by ultrasonography. Where available, nuclear medicine examinations (scintigraph y) are applied to evaluate the functional 
status of the thyroid. Other imaging methods are of little value. 
Subclinical thyroid diseases have subtle clinical manifestations and 
may mimic other diseases. Non-thyroidal conditions, e.g. renal failure, liver disease, fulminant infections and me tabolic diseases may cause adaptive 
responses of the thyroid. Furthermore, thyroid diseases may be only partly responsible for a complex presentation of symptoms. It is therefore important to differentiate the various c onditions to guide the physician in the 
correct diagnosis and treatment. 
7.5 Malignancies (cancer) 
Although malignant diseases are commonly considered as 
noncommunicable diseases, there is enough evidence demonstrating that 
certain types of cancer are caused by infective agents, whereas others are 
caused by environmental factors, lifestyle or genetic disposition. Combined factors increase the risk to a patient of developing cancer. With increasing life expectancy of populations in developing countries the diagnosis of malignant disease gains importance. In fact certain types of cancer occur almost exclusively in developing countries and are closely linked to the prevalence of certain communicable diseases (e.g. HBV infection and liver cancer). The causative agents of certain types of cancer are listed in Table 
The clinical symptoms of cancer are often unspecific (fever, fatigue, 
weakness, weight loss, etc.) or they may vary according to the function of 
Noncommunicable diseases 209 
 the organs that are affected. Sometimes the clinical symptoms observed in a 
patient are caused by cancer metastases in other parts of his/her body than by 
the genuine tumour, thus complicating the search for a diagnosis. 
Table 7.7 Possible causes of cancer 
Infective agent Cancer 
HBV, HCV, flukes 
Papilloma virus 
HIV Helicobacter pylori , EBV, HIV 
Epstein–Barr virus Epstein–Barr virus, HIV Schistosoma 
HTLV-1 Liver 
Kaposi sarcoma Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Nasopharyngeal Hodgkin disease Bladder 
Other causes 
Contaminated food (aflatoxin B1) Salt Meat Ultraviolet radiation Nuclear radiation 
Obesity* Lung, bladder 
Liver Stomach Colon, rectum Skin Blood, thyroid 
Uterus, kidney, gall bladder, breast 
*see body–mass index in the glossary. 
7.5.1 Laboratory indicators 
A number of laboratory indicators in body fluids may be abnormal 
without being specific enough to make a diagnosis of cancer (e.g. haemoglobin, ESR, CRP, transaminases, phosphatases, etc.). Often the diagnosis of cancer requires histological and/or cytological examination of biopsy material. Only very few laboratory indicators (AFP, PSA) are specific for certain types of cancer, such as atypi cal blood cells for certain types of 
blood cancer. The so-called tumour markers are not useful make a diagnosis but are helpful to monitor the development of cancer during therapy. 
210 Good clinical diagnostic practice 
 7.5.2 Diagnostic imaging 
Apart from screening examination, which will not be further evaluated 
here, indications for diagnostic imag ing of malignant disease should be 
dictated by the clinical situation. Two main areas can be distinguished: to diagnose and evaluate a primary malignant tumour; and to search for metastases, preferentially in the liver, bones, lung or brain. 
Relevant clinical information is essential for the imaging department 
to make a correct diagnosis. The clinical problems should be discussed with staff of the radiologist and other releva nt staff of the imaging department, to 
find the best possible approach to th e problems. Open-ended requests such 
as “ultrasound of abdomen”, without specifying what to look for and what may be suspected clinically, are most inappropriate and of no value. 